[Amit Varma]: What is a life well lived? In my darker moments, I could argue that there can be no such thing
[Amit Varma]: because all lives end in death and then nothing before has any meaning. No, but seriously,
[Amit Varma]: how does one define a life that is worth living, that one can look back on with satisfaction?
[Amit Varma]: When I was young, my notion of a good life had everything to do with goals. I wanted
[Amit Varma]: to achieve ABC, then XYZ, and I thought that would make my life a good one. With age, I've
[Amit Varma]: learned that the joy is in the journey, no matter what the destination is or whether
[Amit Varma]: you even get there. I want to wake up every morning looking forward to the day and having
[Amit Varma]: goals gets in the way of that. We remain stressed about the goals we have yet to achieve. I'd
[Amit Varma]: rather just enjoy the things I do, take pleasure in small joys. Now, many people will also
[Amit Varma]: define a life well lived by speaking about what one has done to make the world a better
[Amit Varma]: place. This is nebulous and hard to quantify. Anyone who has worked at any job or has bought
[Amit Varma]: things or sold things has made others better off because all voluntary transactions are
[Amit Varma]: a win-win game. In fact, I'd argue that just by surviving, you make the world a better
[Amit Varma]: place unless you're always on Twitter. Now, a part of me is sceptical about the rest of
[Amit Varma]: the world. I've quoted that famous line from Kashi Ka Assi before, Bhaar Mein Jai Duniya,
[Amit Varma]: Hum Bajai Harmonia. I want to play my harmonia. And the question then is, how can I make sure
[Amit Varma]: that I get the most satisfaction from my life? And here, I'm struck by something that my
[Amit Varma]: guest in this episode says in the second half of our conversation, that her idea of happiness
[Amit Varma]: is to have something to do to keep the mind concentrated. I love that thought. Do something
[Amit Varma]: you want to do and stay busy doing it. The happiness is in the doing.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. My guest today is Nirupa Maharao, who retired a few
[Amit Varma]: years ago as Foreign Secretary of India, and has had a rich life in which she topped the
[Amit Varma]: Civil Services exam in 1973, chose the Foreign Service, travelled the world, played an important
[Amit Varma]: role in India's relationship with China, America, Russia and Sri Lanka, and always remained
[Amit Varma]: curious about the world and passionate about her interests. An amateur musician as a kid,
[Amit Varma]: she started learning opera seriously after crossing 50, and went on to be the driving
[Amit Varma]: force behind the South Asia Symphony Orchestra, which brings talented musicians from the region
[Amit Varma]: together. She's also written a book that's just out called The Fractured Himalaya, India-Tibet-China
[Amit Varma]: 1949-1962. Nirupa Maharao has been a diplomat herself, of course, and an expert on China,
[Amit Varma]: and in this book, she combines a practitioner's hard-nosed point of view with a historian's
[Amit Varma]: rigor. I've done many episodes on India's relationship with China before this and read
[Amit Varma]: many books on it, but I learnt a lot that was new for me from this fantastic book. Please
[Amit Varma]: do add The Fractured Himalaya to your collection. In our conversation though, I was more interested
[Amit Varma]: in talking about her life, so that's what we do. When someone with so much energy and
[Amit Varma]: humility lives such a rich and eventful life, there are plenty of life lessons for people
[Amit Varma]: like us to learn. So I loved this conversation and I learnt from this conversation and I'm
[Amit Varma]: sure you will too. But before you listen to it, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And oh, by the way, this was recorded before Russia's invasion of Ukraine, which is why
[Amit Varma]: we don't mention it at all.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading
[Amit Varma]: habit. This means that I read more books, but I also read more long-form articles and
[Amit Varma]: essays. There's a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the problem we all
[Amit Varma]: face is, how do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know what to read? How do we put
[Amit Varma]: the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered one way. A couple of friends of mine run this
[Amit Varma]: awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com, which aims to help people up-level themselves
[Amit Varma]: by reading more. A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called The Daily
[Amit Varma]: Reader. Every day for six months, they sent me a long-form article to read. The subjects
[Amit Varma]: I discovered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade.
[Amit Varma]: This helped me build a habit of reading. At the end of every day, I understood the world
[Amit Varma]: a little better than I did before. So if you want to build your reading habit, head on
[Amit Varma]: over to CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily Reader. New batches start every month.
[Amit Varma]: They also have a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up-to-date with
[Amit Varma]: ideas, skills, and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future. Future
[Amit Varma]: Stack batches start every Saturday. Also, check out their Social Capital Compound, which
[Amit Varma]: helps you master social media. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees
[Amit Varma]: – 2,500 if you use the discount code UNSEEN. So head on over to ctqcompounds at ctqcompounds.com
[Amit Varma]: and use the code UNSEEN. Up-level yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Nirupama, welcome to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you so much, Amit. Great to be here. I've listened to your podcast for a long time
[Amit Varma]: and admired it very much.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you. That's so kind of you. And one of the reasons I was, you know, looking forward
[Amit Varma]: to recording with you is that some of the subjects that, you know, you're an expert
[Amit Varma]: on are subjects that I've done many episodes on. I've done episodes on foreign affairs.
[Amit Varma]: I've done episodes on China. But you bring a unique perspective to it as an actual practitioner
[Amit Varma]: in this field, you know, having been in the Indian Foreign Service for all these years.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you joined the Indian Foreign Service in the year I was born. And your book, The
[Amit Varma]: Fractured Himalaya, has, you know, so many interesting sort of inside perspectives on
[Amit Varma]: a subject that I thought I broadly knew. But still, I learned something from it. But, you
[Amit Varma]: know, as we begin, what I'd really love to do is start by talking about your childhood.
[Amit Varma]: You know, where were you born? Where did you grow up? What were the early years like?
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit. The fact that you mentioned that you were born in the year I joined the
[Guest]: Foreign Service really makes me quite dated, as you can well imagine. To tell you about
[Guest]: my childhood, I had a perfectly normal childhood, a happy childhood, I would say. I am the daughter
[Guest]: of an army officer. My dad actually joined the Indian Army during World War II. He kind
[Guest]: of quit college. He was in intermediate college in Calicut and he just decided one day that
[Guest]: he didn't want to continue his studies and joined the army in those days as what was
[Guest]: called a Viceroy Commissioned Officer, which today would be called a JCO, Junior Commissioned
[Guest]: Officer. So, he served during World War II, basically in the subcontinent, in places that
[Guest]: are now in Pakistan and also the rest of India. And he got his commission as a lieutenant
[Guest]: the year I think he married my mom, which was 1949. And I was born in December 1950.
[Guest]: And my early childhood, till the age of five, was spent in Bangalore. We lived in a, well,
[Guest]: pictures of that time, when I see, I realize what a different place Bangalore was. And
[Guest]: we lived in a very, I think, leisurely sort of environment in what is now Cambridge layout
[Guest]: in Bangalore. The rumor has it that this was an old bungalow that Winston Churchill stayed
[Guest]: in. But, you know, I've heard this from many people that I stayed in a bungalow that Winston
[Amit Varma]: Churchill stayed in. He must have moved around a lot. Absolutely, when he was posted in Bangalore
[Guest]: at the end of the 19th century. So, but Bangalore as a city does have a history that goes back
[Guest]: into the colonial times, when really it was garrisoned and became a part of the British
[Guest]: stronghold in South India and what they call the Carnatic in those days. So, I grew up
[Guest]: here. I started school here. And then after that, my father was posted in Pune, as it
[Guest]: was called, now Pune. And from there, we went to Lucknow. I studied in Lucknow for a few
[Guest]: years. And then we ended up in Wellington in the Nilgiris. And I finished school in
[Guest]: Coonoor. Coonoor is kind of a twin city to, twin town to Wellington. So, I finished school
[Guest]: there. My ambition from the age of 12 was to become a diplomat. And why, you may ask,
[Guest]: it was because an uncle of mine, my mother's brother, was in the Foreign Service. And he
[Guest]: had served in occupied Japan, as it was called, soon after World War II. As you know, the
[Guest]: Americans were there for a few years. And my uncle happened to serve in Japan. And he
[Guest]: would come back and tell us stories about his life there. And he brought back a lot
[Guest]: of little, you know, collectibles that were all arranged very neatly in a, you know, middle-class
[Guest]: households where they keep all these decoration items in a kind of a glass case. And as kids,
[Guest]: we would look through the glass and, you know, look at pictures of Mount Fuji and pictures
[Guest]: of Japanese women in their kimonos and little knickknacks. So, that fascinated me. That
[Guest]: got me thinking about the world beyond what I was accustomed to. So, it kind of kindled
[Guest]: a curiosity about wanting to know about places that I could only imagine, I could only dream
[Guest]: about. You know, there was no scope or no question of traveling abroad in those days.
[Guest]: As you know, air travel was extremely expensive. It's not like affordable as it is today. It
[Guest]: wasn't affordable. And in any case, my parents couldn't have afforded that kind of lifestyle.
[Guest]: So, we lived a very simple life, actually. My mother was a homemaker and she was a, you
[Guest]: know, we managed with whatever little we had. We were three girls, three daughters. I didn't
[Guest]: have brothers. And we were brought up in an army environment, which was quite cosmopolitan
[Guest]: because the uncles and aunties were not just from Kerala. I mean, I belong to Kerala. The
[Guest]: uncles and aunties came from all over the country. And that kind of also, I think, enabled
[Guest]: me to grow up with that kind of fan Indian perspective because I hadn't lived in Kerala
[Guest]: and I used to go there for holidays. I used to love going to our Tharavad, you know, the
[Guest]: Tharavad, the matrilineal Kerala family, the Tharavad house, and listen to my grandmother
[Guest]: speak about the history of the Tharavad, which is the matrilineal joint family.
[Guest]: So, I had a perspective about Kerala. I was a voracious reader in English, basically,
[Guest]: although I was tutored in Malayalam and I can read and write Malayalam, but I don't read
[Guest]: in Malayalam, let us say that. English is the language which I've been familiar with
[Guest]: from my childhood. So, as a voracious reader, I would just have my nose buried in a book while
[Guest]: my sisters were playing or, you know, I wasn't much of an outdoors person, I must confess,
[Guest]: a bit of a couch potato, reading all the time and a good student. And I would say my mother would
[Guest]: always categorize me among her daughters as the most persevering, most persevering. So, that was
[Amit Varma]: me and that's the way I grew up. Yeah, I mean, just thinking of, you know, everything you described,
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me that if there is a recipe for someone who is going to be a career diplomat
[Amit Varma]: later on and travel the world, this seems the start of a great recipe because one,
[Amit Varma]: you have the army background, where you're not, you know, closeted in a particular place or a
[Amit Varma]: particular whatever, but you're meeting people from all over and you're open and you're talking
[Amit Varma]: to them and you're at ease with them. And second, the love of reading and you mentioned elsewhere
[Amit Varma]: that you loved history books as well. So, second, the love of reading. So, you're already in the
[Amit Varma]: world of the imagination, traveling. And at the same time, you have an open mindset because you're
[Amit Varma]: meeting people from everywhere. And there is kind of that self-confidence and by the way, air travel
[Amit Varma]: in my time also was exorbitant. I mean, I think till liberalization and the economy opened up,
[Amit Varma]: I don't think, you know, and my dad was an IAS officer, but even for us, it was, you know,
[Amit Varma]: not something that we experienced much. I'm struck by an interesting matter of the timeline that you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned that at the age of 12, you decided you wanted to be a diplomat and your uncles,
[Amit Varma]: knickknacks and the kind of glimpses that you got of exotic life were part of that. At the age of 12
[Amit Varma]: was also when we lost the war to China. So, in your young imagination as a 12 year old,
[Amit Varma]: what was your sense of what just happened there? What was the sense of the people around you?
[Amit Varma]: Like, was it just viewed as a national humiliation? Or were there sort of narratives to kind of
[Guest]: explain it away or cover it up or whatever? Right. For an 11 year old, 12 year old to listen
[Guest]: to the accounts that my parents would often, you know, when at the dinner table speak of what was
[Guest]: happening on the border with China. And my father was attached to the Madras Regiment, you know,
[Guest]: the Wellington is the Madras Regimental Center. And if you visited it, I think the Madras
[Guest]: Regimental Center and its huge barrack square, to my mind, should be a UNESCO World Heritage Site,
[Guest]: because it is a so well preserved example of British Victorian architecture. You know,
[Guest]: the humongous size of that barrack square and the colonnade of buildings surrounding it.
[Guest]: Even now, when I go there and I try to visit the MRC, as it's called, I try to go to that
[Guest]: barrack square and kind of think about my childhood and, you know, the various army-related
[Guest]: sports events and things we saw, the parades we saw there. So, the Madras Regimental Center,
[Guest]: as you know, was also, it also had soldiers who we lost in the war with China, particularly on
[Guest]: the eastern front, what is now Arunachal Pradesh and where, you know, we fought some disastrous
[Guest]: campaigns in the Tawang sector, the Battle of Namkachu, for instance, and the way the Chinese
[Guest]: came pouring down. So, to a child, I mean, I would hear accounts of how the Chinese came,
[Guest]: you know, multitudes of them came down the mountain, literally, and you, the child is
[Guest]: imagining all that. I had a dentist, you know, I used to go to a dentist for, you know, when you're
[Guest]: growing up, I wore braces when I was growing up. So, my mother would take me to the dentist and
[Guest]: this old, he was an aging man, I think his name was Dr. Matthias, and he would, you know,
[Guest]: it was such a painful treatment and when he would kind of give me an injection in my gum or
[Guest]: something, he would talk about Chinese torture, you know, how the Chinese used very, very, you
[Guest]: know, barbaric methods of dealing with their opponents and prisoners. So, you know, one was
[Guest]: terrified, literally, of what, you know, was happening in the country and, you know, people
[Guest]: were donating their gold jewelry and my mother and others were, you know, giving their little
[Guest]: contribution to the national effort and one, of course, heard on the radio, we heard Prime
[Guest]: Minister Nehru speaking to the nation. So, I remember hearing all those broadcasts. My father
[Guest]: was a news junkie, literally. He would constantly be listening to the radio and I would sit with
[Guest]: him and listen to the news broadcasts and that kindled, again, my interest in current affairs and
[Guest]: what was happening in the world around me. He, my father, in many ways, you know, even though he
[Guest]: hadn't completed his college degree and all, I think he was quite a man with quite a vision, I
[Guest]: think, you know. First of all, we were three daughters, as you know, in those days when you
[Guest]: had girls. You, I mean, girls tended to be confined to a certain definition of how little girls should
[Guest]: be, but in the case of my parents, I think they just encouraged us to embrace the world, you know.
[Guest]: It was, there was nothing we could not do. We were never told that, you know, this is not for you or
[Guest]: you don't even follow a dream like this. We were encouraged to follow our dreams. So, we, my sister
[Guest]: and I were very interested in music. My mother, who had never had a music lesson in her life,
[Guest]: would listen to us and correct us where we were going wrong. She had an instinct, I guess, for it.
[Guest]: And so, we were encouraged. At the age of 15, my parents encouraged, because I was interested,
[Guest]: they bought me a Spanish guitar to, you know, to play along with my singing. And so, even as we
[Guest]: were encouraged to do well in our studies, we were also, you know, they had an open mind, let's say,
[Guest]: about us having such hobbies, singing, playing an instrument, and being, you know, well-rounded
[Guest]: people, knowledgeable about the rest of the world. So, I must credit my parents, really, for having
[Guest]: that vision and not telling us that, you know, when you're 18 or 19, you're going to get married and,
[Guest]: you know, that's, our responsibility ends there. Never, there was never a question of that. We were
[Guest]: going to have careers. My father wanted all of us to be medical doctors, physicians, but I told
[Guest]: my parents when I was 15 or 16, when I joined college in Bangalore, actually, pre-university,
[Guest]: that I wanted to do humanities, that I didn't want to do science, I didn't want to be a doctor,
[Guest]: I wanted to be a civil servant, I wanted to be a diplomat. And they said, fine, if that's your
[Guest]: dream or your desire or your preference, then go with it. And there was no obstacle placed,
[Guest]: you know. They told me, I used to cycle to college. I'm thinking, I mean, those days,
[Guest]: for your parents to say, okay, your child can cycle three kilometers, four kilometers to college
[Guest]: every day, you're in traffic, you're, I mean, they were not that overprotective in that sense.
[Guest]: Sometimes if you're too overprotective of your children, then I think it doesn't prepare them
[Guest]: for life ahead. So, I think they just took all those right approaches to dealing with us.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So, you know, obviously, anyone listening to this would immediately think of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: how lucky you were to have the parents that you did for more than one reason. You know,
[Amit Varma]: when I look back, even on my growing up and most, you know, as much so in yours, I realized that
[Amit Varma]: our vision of the world is so constrained, like unlike today, where there is the internet,
[Amit Varma]: we're getting news and ideas and entertainment from everywhere. That's not the case back then,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so little about the world. So I'm imagining if you grow up in a cloistered
[Amit Varma]: environment where you're told, okay, you get to 18, you get to 21, you get married, and that's it,
[Amit Varma]: you're kind of stuck there because you don't even have the information to rebel in an intelligent
[Amit Varma]: way. And, you know, you've mentioned that didn't watch TV till you were 21, because obviously,
[Amit Varma]: there's no TV, you know, you're listening to radio once in a while, you're getting little
[Amit Varma]: snatches of news. And one of the things that I'm very curious about with all my guests,
[Amit Varma]: and because I've been partly because I've been thinking about how in my own case,
[Amit Varma]: that process was haphazard and random, is how does one form a view of the world? You know,
[Amit Varma]: when we are growing up, how do we look at the world? What are the values that we imbibe? At
[Amit Varma]: one level, of course, we take values from our parents and our peers and all of that. But how
[Amit Varma]: do we form a framework of looking at the world, like in your case, also, you know, you were born
[Amit Varma]: in the same India that I was born and that's the same India that we're living in today. But in one
[Amit Varma]: sense, these are all different Indias, you know, India back then was a completely different place,
[Amit Varma]: it was, I would imagine, though perhaps I'm romanticizing again, that they must have been the
[Amit Varma]: exuberance of a new nationhood. At the same time, it's an incredibly poor nation, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: at the same time, you don't have, you're still dealing with traumas, you're dealing, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the nation's dealing with the trauma of partition. But at the same time, for many years after
[Amit Varma]: partition, you know, people travel between borders, it wasn't such a hard kind of boundary
[Amit Varma]: as it has now become. So what was your sense of India? What was your sense of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Nehru had his idea of India, but what was it? How did you begin to sort of think of your country
[Amit Varma]: think of the world? And do you remember any key moments while growing up, you know, in your
[Amit Varma]: teenage years school as you started, where that deepened, you know, like, what were the significant
[Amit Varma]: layers that kind of got added on to that where you see another aspect and another aspect and so on?
[Guest]: Yeah, you come to think of it, I would pinpoint 1957, I was six years old. And my parents brought,
[Guest]: my father brought home some brochures and some illustrated material about the centenary of the
[Guest]: sepoy rising, 1857. And I saw pictures of, you know, the sepoys, our soldiers being punished,
[Guest]: being hung, you know, literally drawn and quartered by the British, because they had
[Guest]: participated in the rebellion, shot pictures of being, you know, them being, you know, at least
[Guest]: the description said, shot from cannons, although we didn't see pictures of that. So that got me,
[Guest]: I was perpetually asking questions. My mother would say of all the three daughters, I was the
[Guest]: one who would always plague her with questions. Why? You know, what had happened? How did this
[Guest]: happen? So then, you know, I began to, my imagination was kindled by, you know, this was
[Guest]: something that had happened long before I had been born. And my fascination with history and with
[Guest]: dates and things, you know, when I was about five or six years old, I had this kind of capacity,
[Guest]: which went away by the time I was seven. If somebody asked me what was 5th June 1920, what
[Guest]: day was it? And I was able to tell you what day it was. I had some facility to calculate it. I was
[Guest]: actually calculating it in my head. It was not like out of the blue that I was saying it. So,
[Guest]: my parents' friends would like come home and literally line up and ask me questions. And
[Guest]: my parents bought a hundred-year calendar. It was a kind of a brass thing, I remember.
[Guest]: You could, it must have been made in Murshidabad or something with a little bit of decoration.
[Guest]: You could turn a little knob and be able to identify what day some year, some month in some
[Guest]: year was. So, they were constantly playing that game with me, asking this little six-year-old
[Guest]: girl, what was the day on this date in this year? And I would say it correctly. I don't know what
[Guest]: that facility was, but it went away after two years. I couldn't, after that, I couldn't do it.
[Guest]: You know, when you talk of, you know, people talk, psychologists talk of some influence from,
[Guest]: you know, God knows before birth or during birth or whatever. But it's, so that got me in very
[Guest]: interested in history. And when I was about seven years old, my parents who were in Lucknow took us
[Guest]: on a trip to Agra and Delhi to see. So, you know, I would ask about the Mughals. I would, of course,
[Guest]: we lived in Lucknow. So, seeing the residency ruined because of what had happened during
[Guest]: the rising of 1857. I mean, in my brain, these pictures were constantly being created about,
[Guest]: you know, how fascinating our past was or how intriguing and what was this India. And then
[Guest]: train journeys. I didn't travel by air till I was about 16 or so, but train journeys, you know,
[Guest]: taking the Grand Trunk Express from Lucknow, you know, connecting somewhere in Jhansi,
[Guest]: I think you connected to the Grand Trunk Express and you went for two days, you traveled
[Guest]: to then Madras and then took the Mangalore Mail to my hometown in Kerala. So, you know,
[Guest]: the conception of India as a vast country and the changing scenarios as you travel by train,
[Guest]: especially when you cross the Vindhyas, you know, the tunnels were fascinating to a child like me
[Guest]: and the greenery, the beautiful greenery of the Vindhyas, I still remember that as you,
[Guest]: as a train went through that section of the journey. So, you know, the idea of north and
[Guest]: south and central India and the history of our country and the fact that my parents were there
[Guest]: to answer my questions and they were, and my mother particularly, you know, was a graduate,
[Guest]: the first university graduate in her family. She fought with my grandfather to go to college
[Guest]: and that's another thing that fascinates me, you know, between the early 1900s, let us say,
[Guest]: and by 1947, something did happen which was good for Indian women. I don't know whether it was
[Guest]: the freedom struggle or, you know, what was, you know, the opening to the world because information,
[Guest]: the radio, all that had come, although, you know, I don't think my mother grew up with a radio in
[Guest]: the house. There was no electricity, so there was no question of having a radio, but she was well
[Guest]: read and she went to college and so she was there to keep telling me, opening my eyes to a lot of
[Guest]: things and perhaps, you know, kind of guiding me to look here, to look there, and my father
[Guest]: with his love of current affairs and politics. So, my idea of India really grew out of all that
[Guest]: and my fascination with the country and I had identified myself very clearly as Indian,
[Guest]: you know, that it was not like I was a Malayali or, you know, I came from a particular
[Guest]: sect part of Kerala, not like that. I was just what I was, an Indian born and bred.
[Amit Varma]: So, I have, you know, you mentioned those charming train journeys and I have a sort of
[Amit Varma]: something that comes out of a related observation, like a few episodes back, Amitabha Kumar, the
[Amit Varma]: writer and I were talking about how, you know, there was a time where we would write long letters
[Amit Varma]: to each other and that's no longer the case. Now, everything is sort of very transactional,
[Amit Varma]: one-line emails, whatsapp messages, are you free on Friday, I hope you're feeling better,
[Amit Varma]: but not those longer charming details where, you know, you're putting a part of your soul into it
[Amit Varma]: almost and it strikes me that what you said about trains is analogous to it in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: from my childhood, I remember traveling in trains all over the place and you got to see such a
[Amit Varma]: cross-section of the country, you would see the textures of everyday life, the train would stop,
[Amit Varma]: there's a chaiwala outside, different kinds of people you don't actually encounter otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: you're blind to otherwise, are kind of mingling with you and it's like these little temporary
[Amit Varma]: communities in these beautiful spaces and today, again, for someone who hasn't traveled by train
[Amit Varma]: for many many years, probably my fault, it kind of seems that we have boxed ourselves in, at least
[Amit Varma]: people like me, have boxed ourselves in more and more where you are in your air-conditioned apartment
[Amit Varma]: or your air-conditioned office, you get in an air-conditioned car, you get into an air-conditioned
[Amit Varma]: plane and we have kind of closeted ourselves away from the real and I won't even say the real India
[Amit Varma]: in a sense because there are so many real Indias, but just in that sense that, you know, it's become
[Amit Varma]: constrained, like in a way, the internet, the kind of intellectual globalization that brings in
[Amit Varma]: has freed us and given us vaster expanses, but at the same time, in our physical spaces, we have
[Amit Varma]: constrained ourselves to the extent that we may pass through a beautiful tunnel, for example,
[Amit Varma]: and not notice that it's a beautiful tunnel and not look around and marvel at what is there.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, over the years and, you know, a big chunk of your life was at a time where
[Amit Varma]: ubiquitous distractions like smartphones and all of this weren't there and you actually had to look
[Amit Varma]: around and find your entertainment and amusement around you. So, what are your sort of observations
[Amit Varma]: on this and these changes in lives? Like, all of us can agree, yeah, it's of course a net positive,
[Amit Varma]: so many more people are empowered and such richer lives can be lived in terms of we have so much
[Amit Varma]: access to all the books, all the music in the world, but at the same time, maybe something is
[Amit Varma]: lost in terms of just noticing things around you and being mindful of them. So, what are your thoughts?
[Guest]: I completely agree with you and, you know, just the art of writing, let us say. I mean, I'm not
[Guest]: talking of the style or the content, that is something you're gifted with or you're endowed
[Guest]: with, perhaps, but just the art of writing and I remember my mother, the way, and we had teachers
[Guest]: in school also, who emphasized so much about how you wrote your handwriting on paper, how you formed
[Guest]: your letters, how you kind of, you know, picturized literally a sentence. So, your handwriting had to
[Guest]: be perfect and we were, of course, we had elocution classes, you know, the way you spoke was very
[Guest]: important because I went to, I mean, I don't know whether, you know, this is a qualification, but I
[Guest]: went to a convent school where all this was emphasized constantly. It was a Catholic school
[Guest]: and, you know, we all grew up at the age of eight or nine. We were kind of closet Catholics in some
[Guest]: ways, but it didn't influence us, of course, as we grew out of it, you know, we stayed. I mean,
[Guest]: I've been, I'm born a Hindu and, you know, that's the way I've stayed, but yes, I went to this,
[Guest]: I was exposed to this and I think that exposure to that missionary education, you know,
[Guest]: there, I'm sure that this is a, I mean, there's lots of controversies raised around it and people
[Guest]: have very strong views, but in my imagination and in my opinion, I think it enabled me also
[Guest]: to have, you know, to be able to talk about the seen and the unseen, literally. Literally, it was
[Guest]: one was able to gauge all that and form one's independent opinions and, you know, religion
[Guest]: then didn't become a defining factor while you're in school. You went to school to study, to be able
[Guest]: to write well, to speak well, to enrich your knowledge. That really was the education that
[Guest]: we got and yes, I never saw television till I was 21 and came to Delhi to write my UPSC exam,
[Guest]: stayed at my uncle's place and they had a little TV. It was quite, you know, fascinating, you know,
[Guest]: those days Doordarshan had news programs. It had something for youth. They had some youth-related
[Guest]: programs and they had a lot of film music, you know, picturized the songs. I'm trying to remember
[Amit Varma]: what that program was called. It'll come back to me. There was a program in my time in the 80s
[Guest]: called Chitrahaar. Exactly, Chitrahaar. It was called Chitrahaar then also and so it was just
[Guest]: the radio. But if you ask me whether one's childhood was handicapped by the lack of this,
[Guest]: all the technology that we have today and access to information in a globalized world,
[Guest]: I think we were still globalized because, you know, the magazines that my parents, my parents
[Guest]: subscribed to magazines like the Illustrated Weekly of India. My mother would subscribe to
[Guest]: Femina, for instance, and in those days you could also, you know, in the library we used to go to
[Guest]: the in Wellington. I remember the staff college, the defense services staff college library
[Guest]: was open to my father also. So, as children we could access it, borrowing books from there,
[Guest]: going there at least once a week, walking there to just read the magazines. The Time, the Newsweek,
[Guest]: Life, Saturday Evening Post, all the American magazines were also available in India, at least
[Guest]: in the libraries and we were completely, I was, I used to love going through those magazines and
[Guest]: reading about and then I remember the assassination of President Kennedy in November 1963 and my
[Guest]: father hearing it on the radio and telling me what had happened early in the morning after November
[Guest]: 22nd to November 23rd by then and so that also kind of, in a sense, it had an impact on me.
[Guest]: The assassination of the President of the United States, it was a historic event and by I was about
[Guest]: just turned 13, turning 13 at that time. So, I think and then a few months later in May 1964,
[Guest]: Prime Minister Nehru passed away. So, these were all, I think, in a sense, events that impacted
[Guest]: an impressionable young mind. So, information was not sparse or not, you know, unavailable to us.
[Guest]: I think if you had an inquiring mind, yes. It's not like now, of course, where you're living in
[Guest]: this, you're submerged, you have this information overload. I don't think we had an information
[Guest]: overload, but it was not as if we were cut off from sources of information. If you had the means,
[Guest]: I mean, we were fortunate that my parents at least could afford. We were not, otherwise,
[Guest]: we were not, we couldn't, you know, be, we didn't have any luxuries in while growing up,
[Guest]: but certainly access to books and information. My parents, I think, had taken this decision that
[Guest]: they would, we would not want for that. Books and magazines and things were given to us to read and
[Guest]: to ingest. So, that, I think, made a difference. You're making me very nostalgic because all these
[Amit Varma]: names are, you know, like Illustrated Weekly, Life, and is bringing up memories from the past.
[Amit Varma]: I remember at one point, there was a special issue of Life, which reproduced in these small
[Amit Varma]: little boxes, all the covers of Life so far. And that was almost, in a sense, just looking at them,
[Amit Varma]: you felt a story there, you felt like history unfolding in different ways, you know, and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. What I was referring to was not in terms of the negative aspect of not enough information
[Amit Varma]: being available, but the positive aspect of being more, sort of, more mindful of things around us,
[Amit Varma]: and just the quality of sort of noticing. Like I did an episode with the writer Sarah Rai,
[Amit Varma]: grew up in the 60s and 70s as well, 60s and 50s. And at one point when she was talking about a
[Amit Varma]: childhood, the details that she was coming up with were so beautiful and evocative. And I was like,
[Amit Varma]: I just felt so jealous. And I said, how do you remember things so clearly? And she said, Amit,
[Amit Varma]: we had nothing else to do. We had to look at things because it was kind of nothing else to do.
[Guest]: That's right. Talking about that, I remember the movies, you know, in the army, they have this
[Guest]: regimental cinemas. And in Wellington, where my father was stationed, there was this wonderful
[Guest]: movie theater that was called Kilimanjaro. You know, Kilimanjaro is this mountain in, as you
[Guest]: know, I think in Kenya, if I'm not mistaken. And so, where was this Kilimanjaro? And why was it
[Guest]: snow covered? You didn't associate snow in Africa, but yes, Africa has these beautiful mountain
[Guest]: ranges. And why it was called Kilimanjaro, I still don't know. But this, the Madras Regimental
[Guest]: Center in Wellington had a movie theater called Kilimanjaro. And we used to go there to watch
[Guest]: movies once a week. Again, everything was done walking. My parents bought a car when I was 12
[Guest]: years old and my father, my mother particularly wanted to learn to drive. So, she learned to
[Guest]: drive. And so, she was quite a, you know, feisty woman. And she wanted to do these things. And
[Guest]: I remember, so we, the car, we would drive in the car to Kerala because from Coonoor, Penilgiris,
[Guest]: Wellington, my hometown in Kerala is about 100 miles away. It's not very far, but it took about
[Guest]: five hours, six hours to drive down because of the Ghat road and all that. So, when she would drive
[Guest]: in our hometown, and I'm just talking how Kerala has changed. Those days, Malappuram, the place I
[Guest]: was born in, in Kerala, is the place where we have very large population of those we call Maplas,
[Guest]: you know. Maplas, the Muslims of Kerala call Maplas. So, these little Mapla boys, I remember
[Guest]: when she used to drive the car, there would be a kind of train of little boys chasing the car
[Guest]: because they'd never seen a woman driving, you know, in their lives. Those images come to mind.
[Guest]: So, talking about movies and going to the regimental, you know, again, the opening of the mind,
[Guest]: I remember seeing my first cowboy movies, western movies, which I loved, actually,
[Guest]: in these regimental cinemas. And some of the cinemas were not like Kilimanjaro, not a regular
[Guest]: theater, but it would be, you know, the 16 mm projector being operated by somebody and the
[Guest]: projector would constantly break down, electricity would go or, you know, the projector, the reels
[Guest]: needed to be wound. So, somewhere in the middle of the movie, there would be a gap and sometimes
[Guest]: the projector wouldn't work after, you know, that. So, we had to go home having seen half a movie.
[Guest]: But that really made you wonder what happened, you know, after the sequences we saw. And so,
[Guest]: life was like that. Life was punctuated by a lot of these things, but pleasant punctuations,
[Guest]: I think. I mean, I don't remember a time in my childhood where there was sadness or too much
[Guest]: grief. Of course, once grandparents passed away and, of course, there was the sadness associated
[Guest]: with that. But otherwise, you know, life had a certain rhythm to it and a certain tempo and a
[Guest]: certain harmony. I felt a certain, you know, it was like a symphony that was beginning to play and
[Guest]: which sounded very pleasant. And mind you, we never traveled abroad. I'd never been abroad and
[Guest]: but, you know, in these small cantonments, army cantonments where one lived, one was imagining the
[Amit Varma]: whole world, I felt. Marvellous. And I guess another kind of punctuation was sort of moving
[Amit Varma]: from place to place. And I'm fascinated where you spoke about growing up in Lucknow, like looking at
[Amit Varma]: your later work and we'll talk about your music much more after that. You point out how you were
[Amit Varma]: into music as a kid. You got the Spanish guitar and you would sing along with it. And then, you
[Amit Varma]: know, as you joined the foreign service, you got back to it, you know, when you hit 50 and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that there was a lot of that influence was Western influence. You know, you
[Amit Varma]: tried learning opera when in your 50s, you got drawn to that. And I'm going to ask you more
[Amit Varma]: questions about that. But and I'm also struck by the fact that you're in Lucknow at one point in
[Amit Varma]: time and you're at Aurangabad at another point in time. And Lucknow, for example, is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so rich in a particular kind of Hindustani culture and all of that. So tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about how these influences kind of mixed with each other in your life, like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: apart from the influences that one might infer from, you know, the orchestra you put up and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. What were your other sort of things that, you know, what were the other influences that you
[Guest]: were soaking up? Well, Lucknow, as I remember it, you know, we lived in the cantonment, Lucknow
[Guest]: cantonment on a road that was called Kasturba Road. So Kasturba is the, you know, wife of
[Guest]: Mahatma Gandhi. So that's another, I remember, opening one's eyes to her life and understanding
[Guest]: more about her. So we lived on Kasturba Road in an old colonial kind of house, which wasn't
[Guest]: that great. We had a huge compound, but no garden really because it was too big for any gardener
[Guest]: to tend to. And we, Lucknow, my images of Lucknow, since I was eight, seven years old when I went
[Guest]: there and nine years old when I left, was going to school in a tonga. We used to, all of us, maybe
[Guest]: seven or eight kids would pile into a tonga and we used to trouble the tonga driver incessantly.
[Guest]: Poor man, I think we stretched his patience too much, but he used to take us to school. I went
[Guest]: to Loreto convent in Lucknow and I remember some of my friends from there and my parents, of course,
[Guest]: I wasn't exposed really to the Lucknowi culture, perhaps, maybe, you know, in that army
[Guest]: cantonment. My parents themselves had not lived, I mean, my mother certainly had not lived in North
[Guest]: India before. So, we used to go to some of the Kerala Samajam functions, I remember. There was
[Guest]: a Kerala Samajam in Lucknow, so meet a lot of other Malayalis there. So, Onam would be celebrated,
[Guest]: but my parents took me to a lot of the monuments in Lucknow. I remember seeing the Imambara,
[Guest]: beautiful, beautiful historic site and understanding a little more about Awadh,
[Guest]: about the Nawab culture, Nawabi culture, but not too many insights into that. I suppose when you're
[Guest]: seven or eight, there's not much, unless, of course, we had had Hindustani music classes and
[Guest]: all, but we didn't have. In fact, to be very frank, I don't think my parents could have afforded
[Guest]: that also. Like, they couldn't afford, for instance, a lot of my friends, children of other
[Guest]: army officers, I knew many who were learning the piano. There was no question we couldn't afford
[Guest]: a piano, and so then we couldn't have piano classes. Similarly, later on, when I was about
[Guest]: 18 years old in Bangalore, we studied Carnatic music. We had a teacher come home and studied
[Guest]: Carnatic music for about a year, year and a half, and then, of course, we moved to Aurangabad.
[Guest]: We didn't follow it up. So, I have some basic background foundational, let's say,
[Guest]: exposure to Carnatic music as a result, but not to Hindustani music, except to listen to the
[Guest]: Binaka Geet Mala and things on those days' Radio Ceylon. Radio Ceylon had a big influence in our
[Guest]: lives because both English and Hindi music, Western and Hindi music, we used to listen to.
[Guest]: And so, we grew up with all the songs from the films and Hindi films of the 50s and 60s,
[Guest]: and Mughal-e-Azam was a huge, you know, newsmaker those days, and I remember seeing the movie
[Guest]: and loving it. So, not unaware, not ignorant of the Hindustani traditions, but not, I would say,
[Guest]: to be frank, not immersed in them also. Learning Hindi in school throughout, of course, from the
[Guest]: age of seven, till I finished my bachelor's degree, I learned Hindi. And, you know, I've
[Amit Varma]: mused in the past that all airports everywhere are really one country, outside of the country,
[Amit Varma]: because all airports are pretty much the same, the sanitized air-conditioned, sleek places with
[Amit Varma]: their shopping malls and all that. And you could just, you know, all airports are like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so set out, set apart from whatever the surroundings are and all that. In a similar sense,
[Amit Varma]: I wonder if it could be said that cantonments are all really one country within a country,
[Guest]: that it's a uniform culture and all of that. Absolutely right. I think cantonments are a
[Guest]: world unto themselves, at least they used to be. Even Aurangabad, I mean, when we were there,
[Guest]: it's not the big city, bustling city it is today, it was not that. But the cantonment was a kind of
[Guest]: little, you know, bubble that was there. All the roads are neatly laid out and, you know,
[Guest]: the garrisons and the little, you know, centers and barracks and the sentries and it's a completely
[Guest]: different world. And then you moved out of the cantonment and it was, again, these many worlds
[Guest]: that one was being exposed to. I agree with you, but airports, when we were growing up,
[Guest]: were very different places. They were little airfields, literally. And when I went to Delhi,
[Guest]: I went to, you know, I had an All India scholarship, university scholarship, which
[Guest]: covered all expenses, including hostel. You had to write an exam, All India exam, and I
[Guest]: got through and I got a scholarship to Delhi University. And I went, my parents, you know,
[Guest]: dispatched me by air. It was a kind of a little gift to me to have, and to Delhi. I remember
[Guest]: them coming right up to the plane to say goodbye. You know, can you imagine today? It's unimaginable.
[Guest]: So, it was a Caravelle, I remember, a Caravelle aircraft. Don't wonder where there are remnants
[Guest]: of them today, but the flight would stop in Hyderabad. There were no non-stop flights to
[Guest]: Delhi. It stopped in Hyderabad and then Delhi. So, but very different. Went to Palam, land in Palam
[Guest]: and again, a very different experience. But that was my only exposure to travel by air
[Guest]: until I went to Japan when I was 19 years old as part of a youth delegation to visit Expo 70,
[Guest]: which was another big watershed in my growing up years.
[Amit Varma]: I also wondered as you were describing your childhood, and again, I'm just kind of thinking
[Amit Varma]: aloud, that are there essential qualities that we carry as individuals, which stay with us
[Amit Varma]: our whole lives? Like on the one hand, I can look back at the 20 year old me and say that,
[Amit Varma]: hey, I'm a completely different person now, completely different. But on the other hand,
[Amit Varma]: I can figure out the certain qualities which have just always stayed with me and been essential.
[Amit Varma]: For example, lack of discipline, daydreaming, I think those have stayed constant. Now, in your
[Amit Varma]: case, it strikes me that one, you are a methodical thinker, you mentioned that you were a topper,
[Amit Varma]: and I think you topped the civil services exams also, and that you've kind of been a topper.
[Amit Varma]: It's evident from your wonderful book that you are, you know, methodical, you're rigorous,
[Amit Varma]: you know, as rigorous as any historian in the way that you've weaved together so many narratives
[Amit Varma]: from so many different sources and done that so well. So, when you look back, say, at the 15 year
[Amit Varma]: old Nirupama Menon, so, you know, how would you describe that girl today? And what aspects of her
[Amit Varma]: do you recognize that, huh, she's me? And what aspects of her do you think, I can't believe I
[Guest]: was like that? Well, positive and negative aspects, I think, I mean, I don't know if you'd
[Guest]: call it negative, but certainly, well, I regard it as a minus that I'm a bit of a loner, right?
[Guest]: As a, even growing up, I was a loner. I mean, I would not be playing with the rest of the children
[Guest]: on the playground. I'd be kind of standing apart and looking at them. And I was, I'm extremely
[Guest]: sensitive by nature. I mean, I'm sort of influenced by the environment around me.
[Guest]: I can be very happy by it, and I can be very sad by it, because even today, if I hear or see news
[Guest]: that is, to my mind, sad or unfortunate, the tears will come to my eyes. So, I tear up very easily,
[Guest]: and that's from childhood. I've been like that. So, extremely sensitive by nature. And that, I
[Guest]: think, the positive side of it is being a loner and being very sensitive is that I am, my mind,
[Guest]: I am in, you know, the imagination within me is constantly sort of generating images that I think
[Guest]: help me as a creative person. I'm not an artist, but it influences my writing. So, my poetry,
[Guest]: for instance, although I haven't written much poetry of late, my music, and the love of history,
[Guest]: which was inculcated by my parents, and also because I was interested in it from a very,
[Guest]: very early age. So, these things have stayed with me. And you mentioned meticulous, yes,
[Guest]: and that I really attribute to my mother, because, you know, she would constantly recite
[Guest]: these lines to me, you must be knowing it, a good, better, best, never let it rest,
[Guest]: until the good is better, and the better best. So, this was what was being drilled into me. And
[Guest]: you know, a young child, you know, all we have children, and you see how little things like that
[Guest]: can really embed themselves in your mind. And you talked of China, I forgot to mention this in 1962.
[Guest]: I was aware of, you know, the Tibetans coming into India from 1959 onwards, because this uncle of
[Guest]: mine who was in the foreign service was an LO to the Dalai Lama when he came to into India the
[Guest]: first time. So, my uncle was escorting the Dalai Lama to Mussoorie in early 1960 by train, and the
[Guest]: train came through Lucknow. I don't know from where it was coming. And my parents were informed,
[Guest]: my uncle must have told my parents about it. So, they took me to the railway station in Lucknow
[Guest]: to meet the young Dalai Lama. So, I still have an autograph book with me,
[Guest]: signed by his holiness on 14th February 1960. What day was it?
[Guest]: Valentine's Day. No, no. What day of the week was it?
[Guest]: I'm sorry. I'm not. This is lost to me. That capacity is lost. If I was the six-year-old
[Guest]: Nirupama Menon, I would have probably been able to tell you, or even seven-year-old.
[Guest]: So, I remember that meeting, that going in, walking into the compartment, train compartment,
[Guest]: compartment, and meeting this young presence, literally. I wouldn't say man, young presence,
[Guest]: you know, in the robes of a Tibetan monk, and young and very pleasant. And I just have the
[Guest]: signature. I have his signature on that autograph book. Till this day, I still possess it and show
[Guest]: it proudly to people. So, these were the things, I think, that have stayed with me, this imagination.
[Guest]: And I have a certain restlessness within me. I'm constantly questing, I feel. So,
[Guest]: even during the pandemic, there's never been a day that I felt bored or, you know, felt that I
[Guest]: have nothing to do. What am I going to do? I'm imprisoned within the four walls of this home,
[Guest]: somebody who's been so used to traveling and moving around. I've never felt that. So,
[Guest]: this capacity to adjust to different rhythms, I think, has stayed with me from my childhood.
[Guest]: So, that's talking about the 15-year-old Nirupama Menon. I think some of these things haven't
[Guest]: changed. I really don't know, looking back, you mentioned that you're not the person
[Guest]: you were when you were 20 years old. You know, at the age of 70, sometimes I think I'm still
[Guest]: the person I was when I was 20 or 21, because I'm still, I feel that every day there is something
[Guest]: new that I have learned, I'm learning, or did not know about. And that, I think, keeps the
[Guest]: flow of life, I think, always very compelling, very interesting, and very absorbing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, in fact, one of the things that sort of struck me about you as I was kind of
[Amit Varma]: watching your videos on YouTube and reading up on all the things that you've done,
[Amit Varma]: is that I just envy your energy, right? Like, there are days where I feel that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so much time has passed, and I just feel lazy, lackadaisical, especially through COVID.
[Amit Varma]: There have been times where you don't really want to do anything, man, you just want to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you kind of lose motivation. And I see you doing so much, writing this wonderful book,
[Amit Varma]: you know, working on your orchestra, as you've done in the last few years. And I'm very envious
[Amit Varma]: of that. But leaving that aside, before we go into the break, and then before we, you know,
[Amit Varma]: resume your career after that, as a diplomat, which I have so many things to ask you on that,
[Amit Varma]: just one broader question, which has kind of struck me in the conversations that I've had
[Amit Varma]: with people of a similar age to age to mine, is how we look at time, per se, like when I'm 20,
[Amit Varma]: you know, someone who's 25 feels like an old man to me. And I think that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: five years feels so long, 10 years feels so long, it is absolutely insane. And then suddenly,
[Amit Varma]: you blink and the years pass. And here I am in my late 40s. And I'm like, where did 20 years go?
[Amit Varma]: And this also then begins to affect how we look at history, that we look back on history then.
[Amit Varma]: And earlier, when we are young, it seems something that happened 150 years ago,
[Amit Varma]: say the 1857 mutiny, that seems so far back. It's like ancient history, right? But then when you've
[Amit Varma]: seen decades pass in your own life, it doesn't seem like ancient history anymore. And there is
[Amit Varma]: a sense that there is this, on one hand, there is this inexorable progress that is happening through
[Amit Varma]: history. But on the other hand, a lot of it is shaped by accident and happenstance and just
[Amit Varma]: kind of random events. So how do you think about time, both in the context of what happens in the
[Amit Varma]: world stage, what happens in history, what happens to humanity, and also in your own life? Like,
[Amit Varma]: how does one look at time? Like, have you, you know, have you, for example, stopped and reflected
[Amit Varma]: about how you kind of want to spend each day? You know, like one of the natural progressions that
[Amit Varma]: people make as they go through lives, and certainly I think about it more and more,
[Amit Varma]: is that so much of our time is just wasted? That is there a way that I can be more mindful
[Amit Varma]: and get more out of this and so on and so forth? So what are your sort of thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Well, I can only speak from my own experience that I tend to throw myself into what I'm doing
[Guest]: with complete, I hate to use the word devotion, but certainly absorption, complete absorption,
[Guest]: which then makes me oblivious, perhaps a little about the world around me. So there is a detached
[Guest]: detachment, I feel, that I've always had, a detachment. And that detachment is not, perhaps,
[Guest]: I could have been, I am in some senses, I think, quite meditative. And, you know,
[Guest]: when I was growing up, my mom would always say that I would always be dreaming about something.
[Guest]: It was like I had this far off look in my eye, which many children, perhaps it's not normal
[Guest]: when children do that. I mean, they're always wondering whether they can go out and play or
[Guest]: meet their friends or have a, what they call now, a play date or a sleepover. That was not,
[Guest]: I was constantly, there was something going on in my head. I don't know what made me like that.
[Guest]: I think I was this sensitivity, this dreamy quality. So that, in a way, perhaps sometimes
[Guest]: severs me from too much chaos. Like I'm somebody, like when I was studying for exams, for instance,
[Guest]: you know, you had to revise, you had to prepare like three, four weeks ahead, you had to make a
[Guest]: timetable and start preparing. But I would constantly be studying or revising, as they
[Guest]: would call it in our time, revising with music blaring around me or people talking in the midst
[Guest]: of some, I would be there, I would not be locking myself in a room. So, I don't know what it was,
[Guest]: this detachment at one level, but at the same time, this ability to be, you know, to balance
[Guest]: the noise around me or the chaos around me, because India, as you know, is so much noise you
[Guest]: always have around you, whatever it is, whether it's family or whether it's when you're traveling
[Guest]: or generally the atmosphere is not silent, it's not quiet. But here I was a very quiet person
[Guest]: inside, but outside the ability to sort of, you know, hear the chaos around you, but somewhere
[Guest]: around there was a barrier that it was not going through and I was able to still do my thing,
[Guest]: as it were. So that, I think, is a quality that has enabled me to survive, in a sense. My recipe
[Guest]: for survival has been that, you know. On the one hand, a detachment, but on the other hand,
[Guest]: an attachment also to what is going on around me. So, that's all I can say.
[Amit Varma]: Recently, I had Mrinal Pandey on my show and she spoke about her mother, the famous writer Shivani.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: And she said that when Mrinalji was a kid, she would see that, you know, they're all eating
[Amit Varma]: together and there's halla gulla all around. But at some point, Shivani ji will just start writing.
[Amit Varma]: And when she starts writing, you know that she's surrounded by three noisy kids, there might be
[Amit Varma]: other things happening. But she's writing, she's focused, she's in her world, nothing can get out
[Amit Varma]: of it. Which, on the one hand, I envy a lot, because I find it so hard to do, any noise
[Amit Varma]: disturbs me, I need to kind of cocoon myself up, the exact opposite of what you said. And on the
[Amit Varma]: other hand, I also wonder if that becomes something that is a necessary survival quality for Indian
[Amit Varma]: women in a broader sense, you know, because with men, we have the privilege often that we can shut
[Amit Varma]: ourselves up, I can go and lock myself in my study and say that five hours I'm going to sit.
[Guest]: And nobody's going to question you.
[Amit Varma]: Nobody's going to question me. Most women have to deal with a much more chaotic texture of life
[Amit Varma]: around them, where, you know, the maid might have come and you got to supervise or something else is
[Amit Varma]: happening. And there's something else in the house. And by the time lunchtime is over, dinner
[Amit Varma]: time is here and all kinds of other crap is happening. So, do you feel that in a sense that
[Amit Varma]: this is, you know, on the one hand, it's a good quality to have if it comes naturally. But do you
[Amit Varma]: also feel that for Indian women, especially, or perhaps for women everywhere, it's a necessary
[Amit Varma]: survival mechanism, because you will never get the kind of me time that men are able to have.
[Guest]: I completely agree with you on that. The other day, I remember I was in a webinar on my book,
[Guest]: actually. So, and I was a speaker. So, you know, I had to sort of make sure that the Wi-Fi was
[Guest]: working properly and the doors were closed and there was no noise. But in the midst of the
[Guest]: webinar, and luckily I was not speaking, somebody else was. And so my husband and son had gone out
[Guest]: for dinner and they come home and the spare set of keys of the house was missing or was not there.
[Guest]: So, my husband sort of comes there and he starts dangling that key in front of me and says,
[Guest]: where's the other keys? I didn't even know where it was, but I had to answer. As a woman, you know,
[Guest]: a man would have said, okay, please go away. I'm not, you know, I think we women are much more
[Guest]: perhaps conditioned or, you know, the way we evolve that kind of genetic code within us,
[Guest]: you tend to be much more patient, I feel, much more patient. You can't afford to be impatient.
[Guest]: You can't afford to show that, you know, you're not going to answer such a question,
[Guest]: even if it's your husband asking you. So, I think husbands and wives also deal differently with each
[Guest]: other because we, as women, tend to be much more patient. I think the load, the load-bearing
[Guest]: capacity of a woman, although physically a man is much stronger, I think the load-bearing capacity
[Amit Varma]: of a woman is much more. Which is really sad. And, you know, I think about the layers,
[Amit Varma]: extra layers that women carry. And one, of course, is the layer in terms of just what a more
[Amit Varma]: dangerous world it is for them, the dangers of the male gaze, as it were. Like, if I go out for a walk
[Amit Varma]: at midnight, I don't have to think about anything. I enter a lift with five people, I don't have to
[Amit Varma]: look around to see who the other people are. Women carry that layer. But more than that, another layer
[Amit Varma]: that they carry is this layer of, you know, they have to labour more than men, always, in kind of
[Amit Varma]: situations. And I wonder whether in your career as well, I mean, we'll speak about your diplomatic
[Amit Varma]: career after the break. And obviously, you were that rare women diplomat, though now I think
[Amit Varma]: almost 30% of the IFS is women. But at the same time, has this layer always been there, that the
[Amit Varma]: people around you may respect you and treat you as an equal and on the surface, everything is fine.
[Amit Varma]: But there is that hidden dynamic that kind of comes into play. You know, you mentioned early
[Amit Varma]: in your diplomatic career that people would say, oh, it's tough for a woman to be a diplomat,
[Amit Varma]: because what if you have to receive someone at a station at night? Or what if you have to be posted
[Amit Varma]: as an ambassador to Ghana, for example, will you be safe there? I mean, I just said that at the top
[Amit Varma]: of my head, you didn't. And many women might not even think about it as an extra layer. It's just
[Amit Varma]: normalized, right? So what are your thoughts on this? Because on the one hand, you would be an
[Amit Varma]: inspiration to women everywhere, because you've had an independent career, you know, obviously
[Amit Varma]: fortunate in your parents and in your choice of spouse and all of that. But you've had a completely
[Amit Varma]: independent career, you topped the civil services, you became a successful diplomat and ambassador,
[Amit Varma]: you became so active after your retirement, you're doing all of this. So one would say,
[Amit Varma]: OK, you're the role model. You're the woman who kind of beat all of this. But at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it would have been harder for you than it would have been for a man. So tell me a little
[Guest]: bit about your thoughts on this. Yes, well, definitely. Although I never sensed the hardness
[Guest]: of it all or the difficulty or the complexity of it all, because one was just living through this,
[Guest]: you see. So as I said, you just, you know, you're in this environment and you're kind of, you're a
[Guest]: trekker, you're a journeywoman, you are exploring, you know, it's like a map. I always think of a
[Guest]: map of life, which when you're born is a very, very small scale map with very little detail,
[Guest]: except you're born and you're growing up. But as you grow up and as you venture forth in life,
[Guest]: the map becomes more and more detailed, all the places you've been to, all the experiences you
[Guest]: had. And by the time you're 60 or 70, this map is wonderfully detailed. It is a large scale map
[Guest]: with precise entries, lats and longs about, you know, where you've been and what you've seen and
[Guest]: what you've experienced. So that's how life has become. And when you look at that map now,
[Guest]: you understand this location or this particular entry on the map, how difficult it was to access
[Guest]: or what the barriers you had to encounter in order to get there, you begin to realize. And that,
[Guest]: at this stage of my life, when I look back, I realize, you know, the mountains I had to climb
[Guest]: and the adversaries I had to encounter. But at that time, when you're actually doing it,
[Guest]: when you're actually rowing your boat, as it were, you're only engaged, your energy is all,
[Guest]: you know, focused on that. So the ability to focus, I think, is extremely important.
[Guest]: And I don't get distracted easily. I think that has really helped me. And I have this,
[Guest]: I have a great passion for perfection, which is, I think, which is sometimes an impossible dream.
[Guest]: Because life is not like that in any. So sometimes I think, yes, a sense of perhaps
[Guest]: disappointment does come to you that you've not been able to do things the way you would have
[Guest]: liked to do them. But not in most cases, I wouldn't say that. When I go look back, I think
[Guest]: I'm generally happy. And I feel thankful to Providence for, you know, enabling me to do
[Guest]: all the things I've done. But yes, it's as a woman, like when I wanted to join the foreign
[Guest]: service, when I qualified in the civil service exam, and I had topped it, and in both the IAS
[Guest]: and the IFS, because those days there were two lists for these two top services, the Indian
[Guest]: Administrative Service, Indian Foreign Service. It's different now. So I had my, I was, and I like
[Guest]: the way the UPSC would refer to you at that time, the name on top was Kumari Nirupama Menon.
[Guest]: So I was Kumari Nirupama Menon, just to show that you were not married and, you know.
[Guest]: So Kumari Nirupama Menon could have joined the IAS and gone to Kerala, which was my home state,
[Guest]: because those days your position on the list would give you that, you know, advantage, let's say.
[Guest]: I could have gone to Kerala. So all my relatives, my uncles and aunts, and even my parents
[Guest]: encouraged me saying, why don't you take the IAS, because you'll go to your home state,
[Guest]: and it's nice for you. A girl, you know, should, can be within a home environment. It'll be much
[Guest]: easier for you as you move up. But I was adamant. I'm a very stubborn person by nature. So I had
[Guest]: decided I was going to join the foreign service, like I decided I wanted to do humanity. So my
[Guest]: parents, that's what I wanted. I'm not changing my mind, but fortunately for me, they never forced
[Guest]: my hand on anything. Okay, that's your choice, but it's not going to be easy. I mean, they did
[Guest]: tell me, because, you know, you would have to serve abroad, and I think every parent would like
[Guest]: their daughter or ultimately to settle down, and they felt there would be problems there,
[Guest]: because unless, you know, you had a spouse who was also able to go with you where you were posted,
[Guest]: preferably if he was from the same, from the foreign service, it would have helped. But that's
[Guest]: not the way life turns out, and as it turned out, yes, I had complicated my life in the beginning
[Guest]: already by, you know, my spouse was in the IAS from the Karnataka Kader, and our first postings,
[Guest]: I remember he was in a place called Koppal, which is in northern Karnataka. At that time,
[Guest]: you know, access to Koppal was very difficult. Today, it's a district headquarters. Those days,
[Guest]: it was a subdivision. So, he was in Koppal, and I was in Vienna. I mean, I cannot think of more,
[Guest]: you know, it was like I was at one side of the world, and he was on the other side, and we
[Guest]: couldn't communicate. There was no email, there was no, you had to write letters, as you said,
[Guest]: and once in a while, a trunk call, an international trunk call, and I can't tell you how complicated
[Guest]: that would be because, you know, in Vienna, you had to contact the operator in London, who would
[Guest]: then connect to Delhi, and then in Delhi, nobody knew where Koppal was. I mean, the place Koppal,
[Guest]: even today, if I asked anybody, where is Koppal, if you were from Delhi, you wouldn't even know,
[Guest]: unless you're from Karnataka, perhaps you would know, or maybe from Telangana, you would perhaps
[Guest]: know, but or southern Maharashtra, Sholapur, and other places. So, the operator in Delhi would
[Guest]: connect you to Bhopal, because they never heard of, and then the Bhopal operator would say who do
[Guest]: you want to speak to, and there was no, the number I would give was not, you know, anywhere in the
[Guest]: Bhopal directory. So, even communication was so difficult. So, as a woman, I think I did encounter,
[Guest]: especially among some, not all, some male, you know, higher-ups in the service, you know, I don't
[Guest]: think they were very, perhaps I would put it as empathy, you know, perhaps if you have a daughter
[Guest]: of your own, you would perhaps understand it, but at empathy about how situations like this, where
[Guest]: you know, you had a young, they would call us lady officers, not woman officers, those just
[Guest]: lady officers, what situations they would be in, because as you know, in the foreign service,
[Guest]: still a certain stage in the history of our foreign service, women, once they got married,
[Guest]: had to quit the service. You had to submit your resignation with the information that
[Guest]: you were getting married, and a lot of real talent was lost to the service as a result.
[Guest]: By the time I joined the service, that was not, that requirement was taken away. A little after
[Guest]: I joined the service, because when I applied for the UPS in the UPSC form, I had to confirm if I
[Guest]: was applying for the foreign service that I was unmarried. You couldn't apply, even apply for the
[Guest]: exam, you couldn't write the exam. You had to be Kumari. You had to be Kumari, exactly. So,
[Guest]: this Kumari joined the foreign service as a result, but yes, I remember being told, for instance,
[Guest]: when I once expressed a desire to be posted in Islamabad as a young officer, one senior officer
[Guest]: telling me, it's really not a place for a woman to go. He may have been, you know, motivated by
[Guest]: perfectly good intentions, but I'm saying there are certain mindsets that can women, can women go
[Guest]: to the airport at midnight to receive somebody, or can they be posted in some remote area where,
[Guest]: you know, it'll be difficult to provide for security, all that, you know. But today, if a
[Guest]: woman officer were to say, I want to go be posted in Afghanistan, nobody can stop you, really.
[Guest]: You may counsel saying that it's going to be difficult, but ultimately, you can't say you
[Guest]: can't go anywhere because you're a woman. So, things have really, really changed in that sense,
[Guest]: and I would say, you know, when I joined the service, I don't believe there were any women
[Guest]: in the service who were given, you know, who were asked to head what we call a territorial
[Guest]: division dealing with the neighborhood, let's say on Pakistan or Bangladesh or even China.
[Guest]: But by the time one kind of grew up in the service, that was changing, you know. I became
[Guest]: the first woman officer in the foreign service to head the East Asia division of the ministry.
[Guest]: We dealt with China and, you know, so things changed. I think attitudes have changed, have
[Guest]: certainly changed for the better. And there's much more sensitivity to the needs of women
[Guest]: officers and, you know, and in a sense, providing that level playing field, which is most important.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break. And when we are back from the break,
[Amit Varma]: we'll talk much more about your diplomatic career.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Seed and
[Amit Varma]: the Unseen. I'm chatting with Nirupama Rao and we've just got to the part where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you've entered the diplomacy, topped both the IAS and the IFS. But before that, when we took the
[Amit Varma]: break, you were telling me about how you first discovered computers and you discovered computers
[Amit Varma]: because you liked algebra. It's, you know, such a fascinating story. So do go through.
[Guest]: So the story really begins in the mid 60s when I was still finishing school. And in our school
[Guest]: at in the 11th standard, as it was called, you had to there were certain optional subjects and
[Guest]: I chose algebra and my friends chose typing. And those days, you know, it was all typewriters,
[Guest]: manual typewriters. So my friends during lunch break would go into this little room where they
[Guest]: had the typewriters to practice their typing. And although I was doing algebra, I would go with them
[Guest]: and trail along and watch them, you know, operate the QWERTY keyboard and the way you had to place
[Guest]: your fingers, you know, your little finger on this key and your ring finger on the other key
[Guest]: and the middle finger and the index finger, the thumb. So I learned that technique how to
[Guest]: type blind. I mean, not looking at the keyboard, but looking at the paper as you were typing.
[Guest]: So I had learned that and I used to practice that. We had an old typewriter at home,
[Guest]: which I used to practice on. So by the time I entered college, I was pretty good with typing.
[Guest]: I couldn't do the numbers, the numerals, which I had to still look, but the letters I could do
[Guest]: blind. I could and I did it pretty fast. So when computers, when, you know, in the 80s in Delhi,
[Guest]: Rajiv Gandhi became prime minister in 1984 after the assassination of his mother. And here was this
[Guest]: young prime minister who was all into computers, who was talking about this, you know, digital
[Guest]: universe that was completely unexplored to people like me. So we were encouraged, we were encouraged,
[Guest]: not, it was not made compulsory, but we were told that if we wanted to start using computers,
[Guest]: the ministry would provide us with the machine as it was called. And so I opted to ask for a
[Guest]: small desktop computer because I was dealing with the China border and at a stage where we were,
[Guest]: you know, I was actually, my office was turned into a map room. We had maps of the border and
[Guest]: my task was to set up that map room and to become more knowledgeable about the Sino-Indian border
[Guest]: because the historical division of the Ministry of External Affairs had become largely defunct by
[Guest]: then. Most of the experts from Dr. Gopal's generation, the wonderful experts on the
[Guest]: boundary, they were all retiring or they had passed away and there was no foreign service,
[Guest]: as we call a direct recruit, a foreign service officer who had specialized in this. So I was
[Guest]: kind of offered the possibility of kind of becoming an expert on the subject or at least
[Guest]: specializing in it because I was not interested in taking a foreign posting at that time. My
[Guest]: husband was in India and my son was very young, so I wanted to stay in Delhi. So I stayed in Delhi
[Guest]: for eight years just specializing on the Sino-Indian border and ended up as head of the
[Guest]: East Asia division as a result. It was the time when we had the Sumderong Chu incident, the
[Guest]: problems with the Chinese. Rajiv Gandhi went to China in 1988. So that's the background against
[Guest]: which I started doing learning, not learning, nobody taught me how to operate a computer.
[Guest]: I mean the oning and offing, yes, maybe somebody had to tell me how to do that. But as far as
[Guest]: learning to word process, which is essentially what one does, most of us, we are not programmers
[Guest]: or software experts, but I learned to operate the computer to essentially write, to do my notes,
[Guest]: to put together information, to prepare indexes and things. So it was an old ancient word
[Guest]: processing software called WordStar that I started with and then we moved on to WordPerfect
[Guest]: and then of course MS Word. By the mid-90s it had become MS Word. And so that was my
[Guest]: introduction to computers. I remember my first, seeing a laptop for the first time was when we
[Guest]: were told that Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi used a laptop and we were going to China in 1988 and
[Guest]: that's when I first saw the laptop that some people were using. So that's how I got introduced
[Guest]: to computers and I've never, I felt comfortable in that world. I felt I liked the automation,
[Guest]: I liked the idea that it made your work more efficient, easier to manage and keep in one place,
[Guest]: even if it was a floppy disk or, you know, the way of storage was very different as you know.
[Guest]: The whole system today looks so completely unrecognisable when you think of those early,
[Guest]: almost prehistoric days when we started using computers, like people like me,
[Guest]: bureaucrats for word processing basically. But basically as a word processor, not the most
[Guest]: efficient use of a computer but certainly, you know, you became familiar with the technology
[Guest]: and you, I find many people of my generation, I mean people born in the 50s are still a bit
[Guest]: overwhelmed, you know, by the thought of using a computer. So using the computer at a young,
[Guest]: I started when I was about 34 years old or so, which is relatively young, I think anybody would
[Guest]: say. And that sort of helped me to go into email use and navigating the web once, you know, you
[Guest]: had browsers. By the mid 90s by Netscape and then Google of course started and this whole universe
[Guest]: opened up for you. So I transitioned, let's say, from the world of my childhood to the digital
[Guest]: world of today rather smoothly. I don't think there was any, it was an interesting journey
[Guest]: but not a formidable journey for me. And you've brought so many memories back,
[Amit Varma]: like I remember when I graduated from college in 94, I worked for a year in an advertising agency
[Amit Varma]: for a few months in an advertising agency in Delhi called HTA, which is now J Walter Thompson.
[Amit Varma]: And in our whole department, and that was India's number one ad agency, I was in the Pepsi group,
[Amit Varma]: my group handled Pepsi and a few other accounts. And on the whole floor, I think we had three
[Amit Varma]: computers and one of them was an Apple Macintosh, which only the main art director got access to,
[Amit Varma]: and the rest were two Windows computers, which the operating system was MS-DOS.
[Amit Varma]: So you had to type those commands. And we use WordStar, if I remember correctly,
[Amit Varma]: and it was such a big deal. And later, I remember in 95, I came to Bombay, I worked in Channel V
[Amit Varma]: for a while as a script writer. And we didn't have computers to write our scripts on the entire
[Amit Varma]: place at one computer, which was with the public relations department. And they were so possessive
[Amit Varma]: about it. And then there were two sort of girls who ran the department, one of them became a VJ
[Amit Varma]: later. And I remember all the fights we used to have where I was like, in your off time,
[Amit Varma]: please let me use your computer. And in that year, I was, you know, staying in a flat in Chembur with
[Amit Varma]: three other friends. And all of them knew that Amit really wants to buy a laptop. But of course,
[Amit Varma]: he is not he doesn't have too much money. So we what can we do? And then, you know, one of my
[Amit Varma]: friends heard about the sale of computers and laptops, there is a sale organized on this state.
[Amit Varma]: So we like take an early train to get there early. And my budget was 30,000, which was not enough to
[Amit Varma]: buy a good laptop in those days, because they were more expensive. And I remember we kind of
[Amit Varma]: lined up and we landed up too late, all the affordable stuff was gone, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason I bring this up was, my dad passed away last year. So I went recently to you know,
[Amit Varma]: we sold his bungalow. And I went recently to clear it of all his old things. And in his study,
[Amit Varma]: he had 1000s of books, which I managed to find a good library to donate to. And while I was there,
[Amit Varma]: while I was packing and unpacking things, I found a couple of really old laptops from the 90s, or
[Amit Varma]: maybe the 80s. Right? Now, I remember my contemporary memories of that time are that laptops
[Amit Varma]: are they seem so sleek to me. But now when I looked at those same laptops, which would have
[Amit Varma]: seemed sleek to me, then they were like bulky and massive and really ugly. And, and of course,
[Amit Varma]: I had to throw them away. Because what does one do one can't hang on to old artifacts. I also found
[Amit Varma]: like a huge Walkman, you know, a huge Walkman from back in the day, right, which was kind of
[Amit Varma]: so massive. So it's so it's interesting that all of this stuff does around us, we take it so much
[Amit Varma]: for granted, like it's the air around us. But when we are without it, it's almost like a fish does
[Guest]: not notice the water. No, you're right. Absolutely. But for me, I look back, you know, as that first
[Guest]: computer I used in 1985. It was like a right of initiation, I think, you know, yeah, you kind of,
[Guest]: you go in and then you realize how where that journey is lead like the map I told you about,
[Guest]: you know, it's like you're plotting new destinations, thanks to that little box in
[Guest]: front of you, literally, literally. Today, when I think of things like digital humanities,
[Guest]: which has become a huge thing, you know, and I realized that I think I mean, I may be wrong,
[Guest]: that even to till this day, when you look at the Sino Indian border, and you look at during the
[Guest]: 60s, the kind of information 50s and 60s, early 60s, before the war, the information we put out
[Guest]: the white papers, and the report of the officials, the officials of the two sides, I talk about it
[Guest]: in my book met in 1960. And they had hugely lengthy discussions. Nobody I think to this day,
[Guest]: I may be wrong, but I mean, I'm please correct me if I am. But I think it would be wonderful to
[Guest]: start a digital humanities project on indexing the Sino Indian border, and the maps are all there.
[Guest]: And we have good, you know, cartographic knowledge, and the evidence is there. But
[Guest]: for a scholar, for a young demographic, introduced to the subject for the first time,
[Guest]: wouldn't it be nice if, you know, digitally, if you type Galwan, for instance, you got all the
[Guest]: whole list of what happened in Galwan from 1961, 62 onwards, or in hot springs, or in, you know,
[Guest]: Konkala, or Chumar, or Debsang, that would be so useful. You know, today, you have to be a complete
[Guest]: expert. There'll be one or two people who will be able to perhaps reel off all the details. But
[Guest]: information to me should be accessible. That is the primary foundational requirement for
[Guest]: knowledge. And it's only when you have that knowledge that you can really be enlightened.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and the thing is, the knowledge exists, the tools exist. Now, it's up to someone to
[Amit Varma]: build those repositories. Maybe someone listening to this can, you know, come up with a way of kind
[Guest]: of getting that done. Wonderful things can happen. It should be quite easy. I'm sure it
[Guest]: shouldn't be difficult. Just requires, I think, a technical mind with working with somebody who
[Amit Varma]: has knowledge. So, let's talk about diplomacy. And interesting, like you gave this excellent
[Amit Varma]: speech called A Life in Diplomacy, which I'll link from the show notes, which I really enjoyed
[Amit Varma]: listening to. And at the start, you spoke about how female diplomats are kind of a new thing.
[Amit Varma]: You speak about how, you know, the women in diplomacy would be the wives of ambassadors,
[Amit Varma]: or ambassadresses, as you call them. I had to figure out how to spell that, you know,
[Guest]: it's very complicated. Yes, you're right. Ambassador. The ambassadress could be a
[Amit Varma]: formidable lady, usually. Yeah, and you quoted from sort of NYT, 1902, talking about how in
[Amit Varma]: parties the ambassadress is more important than the ambassador. And quote, sometimes she is a
[Amit Varma]: touchy person, stop quote. You cited a speech from the British House of Commons in 1933,
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, the speaker said, quote, the special virtues of women are singularly
[Amit Varma]: ill adapted to diplomatic life, stop quote. And basically talking about how women have
[Amit Varma]: intuition and sympathy, and they're both fatal to diplomacy, which is a classic stereotype.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, when we when we actually look at the great mistakes made in foreign policy
[Amit Varma]: through the decades and centuries, they're all made by men. And they're often made by men who've
[Amit Varma]: either shown too much intuition, like I think, you know, that was perhaps a Nairuvian thing,
[Guest]: but we can come back to talking about it. You know, that reminds me when we, you know,
[Guest]: you talk of a glass ceiling, that women, you know, should break the glass ceiling. But have
[Guest]: you heard of the glass cliff? No. So the glass cliff is, you know, women are usually pushed
[Guest]: into positions of responsibility when men know that there is the possibility of failure is very,
[Guest]: very large. I mean, there are, I've read about this, and I can from experience also just say
[Guest]: that. So, you know, women tend sometimes to kind of then stereotype, ah, you know, it was a woman,
[Guest]: you know, like intuition and sympathy are fatal to diplomacy, the things you, you know, men have
[Guest]: these certain definitions of what success should mean. But the glass cliff is worth studying,
[Guest]: because, you know, when you're put in a place close to a glass cliff, because you could fall
[Guest]: off that glass cliff, the challenges that women face, I think, are quite great.
[Amit Varma]: And it struck me actually, while you know, you were citing that British House of Common Speech,
[Amit Varma]: that intuition, sympathy, and it struck me that actually, and at the risk of stereotyping in the
[Amit Varma]: other direction, it struck me that qualities which you're more likely to have in women are
[Amit Varma]: actually essential and useful for diplomacy and two qualities which struck me as women are less
[Amit Varma]: likely to let the ego get in the way. And women are more likely to listen better, like just in
[Amit Varma]: our everyday lives. And once I started noticing this, I can't help noticing this all around me,
[Amit Varma]: in terms of how often women get interrupted. Right. And it's just so this was kind of one.
[Amit Varma]: So is there something to that? Or am I just stereotyping in the other direction?
[Guest]: No, I think you're right. And I find that in group discussions, also, very often,
[Guest]: the woman in the room will come in towards the end, that is hesitatingly, although she may have
[Guest]: a lot to say, which is substantive and meaningful. But I think it's just the way we're not just not
[Guest]: the programming. I don't think it's something to the conditioning, I think, in the world you've
[Guest]: grown up where, you know, little girls are made of sugar and spice and everything nice. And,
[Guest]: you know, you're seen rather than heard, you know, the usual concept of the kind of modesty
[Guest]: and humility that you should radiate. I think we are conditioned that way, not that we're programmed.
[Guest]: I think if women are programmed in a way, it's to be resilient. I think we're extremely resilient.
[Guest]: I talked to the load bearing capacity. After all, we give birth and, you know, just that is such a,
[Guest]: you know, it's not easy. And I don't think a man could go through that kind of experience.
[Guest]: So I think that qualities of resilience and perseverance and yet, you know, patience and
[Guest]: you said the capacity to listen, the capacity to absorb, the capacity to take a more 360 degree
[Guest]: view and not, you know, not have too much of a shotgun approach, you know, quick to draw,
[Guest]: you know, hand on the holster. We don't have that kind of approach, which means that we get
[Guest]: interrupted because sometimes just the fact that this quietude that surrounds us gets misinterpreted
[Guest]: and people think that you have nothing to say. Or even if you have something to say,
[Guest]: once you've spoken a few words, you can be cut off, you know, cut the mic off kind of.
[Guest]: That is still, I think, quite prevalent. It's not just in India, it's across the world.
[Guest]: I think it's not something that is just native to us. It's there. So women, I think, have to
[Guest]: struggle harder. Definitely. Definitely. We have to, you know, we may look calm on the surface,
[Guest]: but underneath the water, we're constantly paddling, I think.
[Amit Varma]: Pretty much all the female friends I have talk about this common thing that happens to them in
[Amit Varma]: meetings or gatherings, where if they get to speak, they'll say something and then somebody
[Amit Varma]: will cut them in and the conversation will continue. And then a man will say the same
[Amit Varma]: thing, maybe paraphrase it a bit, and they'll be like, Claudette, so what a good idea.
[Guest]: That's true. That's true. Absolutely. Absolutely. That is something that I don't think
[Guest]: changes very easily. And, you know, so we have to, I think, be much more aware of this. And when we
[Guest]: are, you know, our output, therefore, has to be so much more careful, so much more precise,
[Guest]: so much more passionately perfect, if we have to be noticed, I think.
[Amit Varma]: The bar is higher, therefore. There's a fascinating experiment, like you mentioned that in meetings,
[Amit Varma]: you know, women will talk at the end or they won't talk much. And there's a fascinating experiment
[Amit Varma]: carried out by Philip Tetlock. And I heard about this in an episode of a show I produced, Brave
[Amit Varma]: New World, where he was a guest. And the experiment basically was this, that you gather a group of
[Amit Varma]: people together for a meeting. And then everybody gives their views on the subject, but anonymously,
[Amit Varma]: right? And then everybody's views are shown to everybody, but they don't know who said what.
[Amit Varma]: And then they have to revise their views based on everything they have read. And
[Amit Varma]: the experiment basically found what you would expect, that the quality of decision making just
[Amit Varma]: went up massively, because you had to be open to everything once you anonymize the views.
[Amit Varma]: The other question that I sort of want to ask before we, you know, again, you know,
[Amit Varma]: get back to chronology and the linear retelling of life, as it were, is about confidence that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there have been studies that there was a recent study I linked to in a recent episode,
[Amit Varma]: I'll link to it again, which really speaks about how women lack so much confidence compared to men
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that they did this experiment where within a firm, there was a job opening for, you
[Amit Varma]: know, a particular this thing. And you had to, there were 10 parameters, and you if you felt you
[Amit Varma]: made enough of them, you had to apply. And the women would not apply. If they met five or six
[Amit Varma]: or seven, if they met all 10, only then would they apply. While the men they meet two or three,
[Amit Varma]: they'll just apply Bindas, just put it in, right. And the point is, as we know that,
[Amit Varma]: just the more you apply, the better your chances of all of these things. And there is therefore
[Amit Varma]: that, I think the article was correctly called the confidence gap, you know, that comes into play.
[Amit Varma]: Was that confidence gap ever an issue with you? Like, did you feel at any point that there is
[Amit Varma]: some kind of imposter syndrome? That, you know, did you have self doubt about maybe I should have
[Amit Varma]: taken the IAS and gone to Kerala? You know, what am I really cut out for this? So were there moments
[Guest]: where that happened? Yeah, that that is something, you know, I don't I'm missing that gene, I think
[Guest]: that that I don't regret what I've done. Maybe it's this, I was born with it, the sense of
[Guest]: being absolutely convinced that this is what I have to do. And the ability to take risks,
[Guest]: which is usually a masculine trait, but I have that. I mean, I think like when I went out on
[Guest]: Twitter, when I was foreign secretary, nobody was on Twitter, no bureaucrat, no senior bureaucrat,
[Guest]: at least. And I just felt this was a medium that was interesting, that showed a lot of promise
[Guest]: and potential and scope, you know, for better communication and conveying to the rest of the
[Guest]: world that, you know, a bureaucracy can be responsive, can be alert, can be, you know,
[Guest]: not just reactive, but proactive. And I just felt I had to adopt that medium. So I signed up and
[Guest]: opened an account and I started tweeting and people around me were sort of out of consternation
[Guest]: and eyebrows raised. But today, everybody uses it. Everybody and their aunt is using Twitter.
[Guest]: So this, I think it's like, I just feel if I have to do something, I'm absolutely convinced
[Guest]: people around me, especially my near and dear ones, call me stubborn and opinionated. And,
[Guest]: you know, people who can be frank with you, your near and dear will speak their minds.
[Guest]: But I'm like that. I can't change. And so that, I don't know, that may not be an exactly
[Guest]: stereotyped feminine trait. So I'm sure a lot of women have it. But in the world, when you define,
[Guest]: you classify, you have these very narrow categories, women and men and female behavior. I
[Guest]: think these things straddle both sexes. I don't think we are, you know, confined to one category
[Guest]: of behavior. Like, I just feel I can take a risk if I'm convinced that it needs to be done. And
[Guest]: I'll just do it. And that's, that's how it is. That's the way I am.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, one risk was something that you alluded to earlier, where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you join the foreign service at 73. And you know, your husband is part of the same batch,
[Amit Varma]: he's in the IAS. And you make that very interesting decision that you will get married,
[Amit Varma]: even though, and none of you will give up what you're doing, even though it is understood that
[Amit Varma]: then you will be apart most of the time. Right. And as you pointed out, he went to Kollam,
[Amit Varma]: I think you said? Koppal.
[Amit Varma]: Koppal. I'm so sorry. See, this is how obscure the place clearly is.
[Amit Varma]: That is true. It is truly. But no, I'm sure somebody from Koppal wouldn't say that, of course.
[Amit Varma]: Of course not. Yeah, where you stand depends on where you sit, as they say. So yeah,
[Amit Varma]: so one part of this Koppal went to Koppal and the other part of this Koppal went to Vienna.
[Amit Varma]: And you've mentioned that there were times where you managed to be posted in the same place, like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in Delhi in the 80s, where you were with the foreign officer, and he was with the PMO,
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. But in general, then, you know, how was it to kind of make that decision?
[Amit Varma]: And how was it to then sort of live that life? Because I'm thinking in terms of how distance
[Amit Varma]: can sometimes be a good thing. You know, it just strikes me that, you know, two people,
[Amit Varma]: if they're together all the time, can take each other for granted, you know. So do you feel that,
[Amit Varma]: was it frustrating sometimes that, oh, my God, especially that trunk call thing that you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned from Vienna, you are trying and eventually reaching Bhopal after 50 stops in the
[Amit Varma]: way. And so was it frustrating sometimes? And do you also feel that, you know, maybe it had a
[Amit Varma]: positive kind of impact in the sense that the time that you do spend together, you therefore cherish
[Amit Varma]: it more, you're more mindful, you can see each other, not as just instrumental parts of one's
[Amit Varma]: comfort zone, but as actual people who are doing interesting things?
[Guest]: Well, yes, when we started out, it was extremely difficult. I mentioned the Bhopal-Vienna thing,
[Guest]: and then we had to stay apart for long, long periods. So I had to take leave and come to
[Guest]: Karnataka, or he would take leave, he took one year off and came to Vienna. So those kinds of
[Guest]: adjustments had to be made, which the higher ups in the service, whichever bureaucracy,
[Guest]: they were not exactly, I mean, I think eyebrows would be raised. I mean, are you really serious
[Guest]: about your careers? Why are you doing this? And you know how these attitudes can be very
[Guest]: entrenched in any office environment. Then you, you know, there's the usual stereotype,
[Guest]: oh, woman, woman officer, lady officer, not really serious about her job. You know,
[Guest]: she takes leave and she just goes off. So we had to encounter all that, you know, and each time,
[Guest]: you know, you had to sort of climb your way up to restore that kind of confidence that
[Guest]: you wanted. I mean, I think as a woman, you want that respect. I think all of us want that respect
[Guest]: and respect for your dignity, respect for your sincerity and your commitment, which was never
[Guest]: for me. I felt that should not be questioned. I mean, that commitment, I think, was always there,
[Guest]: but sometimes one had to do this because of family reasons. So the early years were difficult for
[Guest]: that reason, because there were these, again, punctuations, you know, that you had to accept
[Guest]: where you would be away from your seat for about seven, eight months in a row because you had taken
[Guest]: leave, and then come back and wait for an assignment, and you would be posted somewhere,
[Guest]: maybe in some backwater, which one accepted because, you know, you wanted to get back into
[Guest]: the system. So, you know, I've had to, all these ups and downs were there. It was not like, you
[Guest]: know, one was always doing China, one was always doing Sri Lanka, one was always, you know, doing
[Guest]: you know, doing as spokesman, you know, communication. So it came much later. The
[Guest]: early years, I think, were not easy at all. I think the real break I got was this, because I
[Guest]: had to stay in Delhi for a long period, this opportunity to work on the Sino-Indian border.
[Guest]: That was a big break in my service, I think. It was a big break in terms of getting that
[Guest]: recognition and that respect, and then on, I think it became easy, but not in the first years. I think
[Guest]: one had to constantly prove oneself, literally. When I heard you talk about diplomacy in one of
[Amit Varma]: the talks that you gave, I was struck by a phrase that you used, that normally journalists use,
[Amit Varma]: where you said that I got to witness the first draft of history, and I find that so fascinating
[Amit Varma]: because in a sense, you get to witness parts of the first draft of history before it actually
[Amit Varma]: takes place, you know. So tell me about what your early years were like. Like, of course,
[Amit Varma]: you went to Vienna, and you made yourself learned German over there, and kind of threw yourself into
[Amit Varma]: that. And later, you mentioned that, you know, you got the Southern Africa became part of your beat,
[Amit Varma]: and you interacted with people from the ANC, you know, when you were 27, when you're young,
[Amit Varma]: and you're interacting with people who have done such incredible things. Yes, you know,
[Guest]: almost precisely, getting, you know, that it was a year of anti-apartheid, 1978, I think,
[Guest]: or 1979. And I was involved in that the programs that India wanted to put up and meeting people
[Guest]: on the Indian side also, you know, are quite legendary, whom, you know, have passed on today,
[Guest]: but were very active at that time. There was a Mr. I think it was Harisharan Chhabra, his name
[Guest]: was used to publish something called the Africa Diary, Africa Journal. And it was quite a standard
[Guest]: reference material for India and Africa. There was people like Mrs. Shanti Sadiq Ali, you know,
[Guest]: who was from our freedom struggle years onwards, who was who had made quite a name for herself,
[Guest]: very respected figure. And she was involved in this anti-apartheid programs that we were putting
[Guest]: out. International year, it was called anti-apartheid. And India was very active. You
[Guest]: know, we had a very prominent role in leading the struggle against apartheid and racial
[Guest]: discrimination. You know, we were really one of those frontline countries in the UN
[Guest]: and internationally in very number of multilateral fora, academically, diplomatically.
[Guest]: So, our Africa policy was very focused on this emphasis on equality, non-discrimination,
[Guest]: inclusiveness. And so, for a young officer, I think it was a wonderful experience. And from
[Guest]: then I went on to deal with Nepal. And again, most absorbing, most complex relationship,
[Guest]: and going to Nepal in the early 1980s, what a different place it was. I remember they had a
[Guest]: lot of trade with China, which we didn't have. We hadn't really opened up to China at that time. So,
[Guest]: the Kathmandu markets would be flooded with a lot of Chinese goods, which a lot of Indians would go
[Guest]: to Nepal to buy. And it's a completely different non-globalized world, I think, where to be
[Guest]: aware of all these things was quite eye-opening. And then on to Sri Lanka. From Nepal, I went to
[Guest]: Sri Lanka. And I dealt with something that was not usually what a diplomat would deal with.
[Guest]: I was dealing with estate laborers in Sri Lanka of people of Indian origin, people who had
[Guest]: been sent as indentured labor in the 19th century to work on the tea plantations of Sri Lanka. And
[Guest]: they were stateless people. They were people left behind, literally. As you know, in Sri Lanka,
[Guest]: the whole Tamil question has been something that has created a lot of divisions within that country.
[Guest]: And at that time, interestingly, our focus was not on the Tamils of the north, not on Jaffna,
[Guest]: and the LTT was just a little blip at that moment. We were very focused on the question of, again,
[Guest]: this question of non-discrimination, which Indian foreign policy had really acquired a stellar
[Guest]: reputation in terms of being identified as one of the lead voices on this. So on the question of
[Guest]: statelessness, these people were stateless. They had no country, literally. They were without a
[Guest]: country. Neither India nor Sri Lanka had accepted them. They were in this limbo. And my task was to,
[Guest]: as a result of a pact between India and Sri Lanka, to process the grant of citizenship to a certain
[Guest]: proportion of these people who could then be sent back to India. So I was dealing with repatriation
[Guest]: and rehabilitation of these people. And I worked at that time with Gopal Gandhi, who was first
[Guest]: secretary, rehabilitation in Kandy. And I was first secretary, repatriation and Indo-Sri Lanka
[Guest]: agreement in Colombo. So we worked in tandem and I would go constantly. Those days you could drive
[Guest]: around on your own. I would take my little yellow Suzuki, the same Maruti Suzuki, the same models
[Guest]: from the 80s. And I would drive alone from Colombo to Kandy, from Colombo to Talai Manar,
[Guest]: from where the ferry was taken by people going back to India. So these migrant, these laborers
[Guest]: who were given Indian passports, it was called an Indo-Sri Lanka passport. It was not the normal
[Guest]: Indian passport, but the India-Sri Lanka passport for repatriation. So I would go to Talai Manar to
[Guest]: kind of oversee the repatriation. So it was a very, it was not usual image that you associate
[Guest]: with diplomacy or diplomat's life. It was part of diplomacy, of course. But I was looking after
[Guest]: their education. We had something called the Ceylon Estate Workers Education Trust, which I was also
[Guest]: handling. So giving a little help for their education, looking at their welfare. They used
[Guest]: to live in these lines, you know, what they call lines. Plantation laborers live like that. And
[Guest]: conditions were quite bad, especially for the women. And then when they would go back to India,
[Guest]: you know, you bought a train ticket. Those days, think of connectivity. We all talk of connectivity
[Guest]: and regional integration. But we were much more, I feel, integrated with our neighbors at that time,
[Guest]: because you could buy a train ticket in Colombo Railway Station to Chennai, to Madras, as it was
[Guest]: called. You would take the night train from Colombo to Talai Manar, which is in the northern part of
[Guest]: the island, get off the train, and then take the ferry from Talai Manar to Rameshwaram about two
[Guest]: hours. And then from Rameshwaram, you got on to the train to Chennai, to Madras. And you were in
[Guest]: Egmore the next morning. So that was the kind of thing. Hardly anybody flew those days. There were
[Guest]: flights from Madras to Colombo, Chennai to Colombo. But basically, you took the ferry. And it was the
[Guest]: SS Ramanujam. That was named after the great Ramanujam. That was the ferry. It was operated
[Guest]: by the Shipping Corporation of India. And you had this agent of the SCI, who would be in Talai
[Guest]: Manar, a man whose name I still remember. His name was Emmanuel. And he used to handle all this
[Guest]: traffic that was going into. So what a different world. I mean, I was handling things like that.
[Guest]: So anti-apartheid Southern Africa, then Nepal, where I had handled a lot of aid projects in
[Guest]: Nepal, and then into Sri Lanka, where I was handling quite, I mean, it was not a very, not the kind of
[Guest]: glamorous assignments that most foreign service officers would want. They would want to do trade,
[Guest]: commerce, or they would want to do political reporting. But here I was doing something much
[Guest]: more mundane, but so satisfying. I can't tell you. I've loved doing work like that, actually,
[Guest]: where you know, you're working with people, and dealing with perhaps people who are unsung
[Guest]: and forgotten. There's an appeal always I've had for reaching out to people like that. And that,
[Guest]: I think, was my experience in Sri Lanka. And then I came back, spent a few years, a few months at
[Guest]: Harvard, where my husband was at the Kennedy School, and then came back and started dealing
[Amit Varma]: with China. And then of course. So I have a couple of like related questions from there.
[Amit Varma]: Like you spoke about, you know, at that age, at that young age, interacting with people in the ANC,
[Amit Varma]: and also, you know, doing that extremely satisfying work in Sri Lanka. Now, it strikes me that
[Amit Varma]: young people often are filled with idealistic zeal on one hand, which of course, must be enhanced
[Amit Varma]: when you meet inspirational people like the people you did meet. And on the other hand, there is that
[Amit Varma]: sort of stereotype of a diplomat's life as being one that necessarily is full of pragmatic
[Amit Varma]: considerations and compromise, and one where you don't necessarily as a diplomat have so much
[Amit Varma]: agency, you know, the guardrails along which you walk are laid down by whatever the stance of the
[Amit Varma]: government of the day is, and there isn't much flexibility within that. So what do you feel about
[Amit Varma]: this particular dichotomy? Like, can it get frustrating sometimes where your government may
[Amit Varma]: have a stance that you don't quite agree with, you feel they're not going far enough, or they're
[Amit Varma]: going in completely the wrong direction, but you have to be professional, you know, and is there
[Amit Varma]: a danger that one can rationalize that to oneself, and then change oneself and lose some of that
[Amit Varma]: idealistic zeal. And this dichotomy is one aspect of it. But at the same time, when you were speaking
[Amit Varma]: about all the work you did in giving these stateless people a state, it seems to me that that
[Amit Varma]: also must be so incredibly satisfying. And that would be an unseen part of a diplomat's life,
[Amit Varma]: that you're bringing change in the world. So tell me a bit about these two aspects, one that sort of
[Amit Varma]: the clash that might happen between your individual idealism and the pragmatism that
[Amit Varma]: necessarily comes with the job. And how many satisfying moments have you found like that one
[Amit Varma]: during your career, where you say that, you know what, I don't care if no one notices, but I'm
[Amit Varma]: making the world a better place. I'm doing a little bit to make the world a better place.
[Guest]: I did feel that when one was in Sri Lanka, and partly because of the happiness it gave me also.
[Guest]: Same thing happened to me in Peru. I was, Peru, you know, when you look at it from India,
[Guest]: you think it's like, you know, it's 10,000 leagues away, literally. And literally, if you could dig
[Guest]: a hole through the center of the earth from Bangalore, probably come out in Lima, Peru,
[Guest]: perhaps, but it's going to take you a while and think of the numerous magma layers you'd have to
[Guest]: negotiate. But anyway, through all that magma, I was in Peru. And I felt what am I going to do now,
[Guest]: because it's, you know, kind of a backwater in terms of what we do there. Yeah, we have,
[Guest]: it's a bit of a sleepy outpost and nothing to do with the country. The country is fascinating. I
[Guest]: love, I really truly love Latin America. That's the other thing. I tried to approach every place.
[Guest]: As I told you, I didn't do very glamorous assignments in the early parts of my career,
[Guest]: and I accepted whatever came my way. I was not, in that way, I wasn't somebody who would go and,
[Guest]: you know, argue with my seniors that I don't deserve to go here. You know, there's a joke,
[Guest]: one of my South Indian, actually, he was from Karnataka. He's no more with us,
[Guest]: unfortunately, a wonderful officer BS Prakash, Ambassador BS Prakash. And like many of us,
[Guest]: when we first were recruited and went to Delhi, we didn't know much Hindi. We learned Hindi in
[Guest]: school, but we never spoke that much. So he would constantly hear, he was dealing with postings of
[Guest]: people abroad, and especially staff, you know, the staff, administrative staff, and they would come
[Guest]: apparently and tell him, he was dealing with it, we want justice. So he thought, justice is a place
[Guest]: somewhere, you know, we need it. And it's, I think, to me, it's so laden with meaning, it's more than
[Guest]: the, you know, the levity of it. I mean, as a young South Indian officer, he really thought
[Guest]: Insaaf was a place. And I think many of us are searching for Insaaf, that place called Insaaf,
[Guest]: you know, it may be Utopia. Utopia is also a place on a map. So Insaaf is also a place on a map,
[Guest]: but I never went up to my superiors and said, I need Insaaf. I mean, I said, I'll take whatever
[Guest]: comes my way and make the best of it. That's been my attitude in life. Whatever you give me,
[Guest]: even if you give me a plate of khichdi, I'll try and, you know, make, try and deal with it and make
[Guest]: the experience as interesting as possible. So I went to Peru and felt at the outset that what will
[Guest]: I do here, but I found if you have an open approach and an inquiring mind, any place on earth
[Guest]: will be fascinating for you. It could be Copal. It could be, you know, Copacabana. Copacabana is
[Guest]: interesting because, you know, the girl from Ipanema and Copacabana and all that is fascinating.
[Guest]: But in Peru, I didn't know Spanish. So I decided I learned Spanish and I ended up speaking fluent
[Guest]: Spanish, you know, in about two years. And then I made wonderful friends there. I discovered the
[Guest]: culture, the culture of Hispanic America. You know, when we in India, we think of the United
[Guest]: States, we think of America. But, you know, in Latin America, they'll say America del Norte,
[Guest]: that is North America. There is a South America too. And South America, as they say, that has,
[Guest]: they call it in Spanish, America de los Indios, that is Indian America. That is Indian America
[Guest]: literally in its entrails, which we don't think of it. And that Indian America is so linked to us.
[Guest]: I mean, apart from the nomenclature, the Spaniards came there and called the Native Americans
[Guest]: Indians. So that's why in Spanish, we are not referred to as Los Indios, the Indians, but
[Guest]: as Los Indues, the Hindus. I mean, all of us, whether we are Hindu, Muslim or Christian,
[Guest]: are Los Indues. So the word Hindu has so many connotations today, especially when, you know,
[Guest]: you talk of the various, you know, definitions of the word, let's say. So then I discovered this
[Guest]: whole universe out there, the music, the culture, the culture of pre-Columbian America, that is
[Guest]: before Columbus, it's called pre-Columbian. Absolutely, you know, something that I had
[Guest]: not known about at first hand. I mean, I read about it, but not in detail. And I can't tell
[Guest]: you that fascination has stayed with me, that interest. I went back to Peru a few years ago,
[Guest]: just like that, on a kind of literally on a pilgrimage for me. I think Latin America is
[Guest]: one of those undiscovered gems for many Indians. And I think our diplomacy really needs to, like
[Guest]: the Chinese foreign office, they start off every year, their foreign minister starts it off with
[Guest]: a trip to Africa or Latin America. It's a kind of emblematic sort of way they approach it.
[Guest]: And so I think we in India also, the other thing I feel that when you talked of listening,
[Guest]: and I think that's extremely important. I think there's also, and this is something I was
[Guest]: inculcated with from early childhood, learn from others' examples. And I think we must,
[Guest]: as Indians, incorporate that more into our psyches, because I think sometimes we tend to
[Guest]: live in a kind of echo chamber. I've written about it also, as you know. I think that we have to get
[Guest]: out of our echo chambers, and I've tried to do that. And when I talked about risk-taking,
[Guest]: I forgot to mention that when I was foreign office spokesman, before that, before my time,
[Guest]: everything was very formalistic. You gave a briefing once a week, and you called people
[Guest]: into your room, and there was nothing, no recording, nothing, microphones. You just
[Guest]: talked to them, answered some questions, and the reporters would go back and file their stories.
[Guest]: I thought we were in the early 2000s, Y2K and all that, and we were at the advent of this 24-7
[Guest]: television had started, and we didn't have social media, but everything was going live, I felt.
[Guest]: So I felt, why don't I start doing live briefings on camera? And it was something that, like my
[Guest]: getting on Twitter, it was totally unorthodox. Something that, you know, you talked about as a
[Guest]: bureaucrat, how do you do things. I mean, while I never went against the party line, so-called
[Guest]: party line, I just, I was a disciplined person. I am disciplined by nature, so I don't try and
[Guest]: do that kind of thing. I don't like to break China that way, you know, and sort of shatter
[Guest]: things. But I will always be thinking of how to improve, you know, the way I'm doing things.
[Guest]: So if I felt that doing a live briefing would, A, convey the image of transparency,
[Guest]: B, it would show we were not just reactive, that we were being proactive, C, that we were much more,
[Guest]: you know, willing to share information, D, we were much more confident about our positions,
[Guest]: and finally, that we could persuade people just by doing this in a more open, direct way. And I
[Guest]: think, again, that was a practice that was followed by all subsequent spokesmen, and has
[Guest]: become the de rigueur, as it were, in the functioning of most of, although even till today,
[Guest]: I always say, our bureaucrats, our diplomats, our people should be much more willing to go up there
[Guest]: and face the world and speak. Because, you know, India has a great story to tell. It's just the
[Guest]: way we have to, we position it, the way we project it, and in the process, how we persuade people.
[Guest]: And I think we have the credibility to do that. And that was the approach I followed. And I think,
[Guest]: so that's how I navigated the whole journey of life, as it were, and kept my interest going,
[Amit Varma]: and my enthusiasm, and the energy, as you said. Let me double click on a couple of interesting
[Amit Varma]: things here. And one is, you know, elsewhere, when you've spoken about your stint in Peru,
[Amit Varma]: and Bolivia, and South America, and all that, you've spoken about the commonalities, right?
[Amit Varma]: You've spoken about how, like us, there has been so much intermingling there, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it's just such a khichdi, a popuri, you know, whether it's language or culture or everything
[Amit Varma]: just kind of coming in. And in many ways, India is like that. And there's a kind of lived liberalism
[Amit Varma]: then in that where everything kind of comes in. But there is also the opposite side. Now,
[Amit Varma]: I can think of someone like you going to Peru and seeing all of this and feeling at home and
[Amit Varma]: finding those common connections, and feeling warmer towards the environment and the culture
[Amit Varma]: around you. But many people also react in exactly the opposite way. Like a lot of the strident
[Amit Varma]: Hindu nationalism that we see comes from NRIs. My, you know, an earlier guest Amitabh Kumar
[Amit Varma]: spoke about how when he wrote an article about how he had married a Pakistani, you know,
[Guest]: I heard that podcast.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, he got a call from this person who said, you are a kutta, you're a harami and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, NRI, right. And, and that's also a natural impulse, I guess, that you go to a
[Amit Varma]: foreign place, and you double down on your feelings of tribal connect with whatever tribe you're from.
[Amit Varma]: And that can, you know, result in this kind of extreme way. And I'm curious about how
[Amit Varma]: these two can exist together. I mean, partly, it's a lament, because one would obviously want
[Amit Varma]: everyone to respond the way that you did, and say that, hey, we're all the same. And that's
[Amit Varma]: also a lesson, for example, that literature teaches you that history teaches you that
[Amit Varma]: ultimately, you know, circumstances are where the differences are, otherwise, we are all the same.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, there is a sort of these disturbing tribal tendencies that also come up.
[Amit Varma]: So it's just a thought. I mean, I don't know if there's a question in this, but
[Amit Varma]: is this something that you've thought about?
[Guest]: I certainly have thought about and I can first and foremost, having lived in the US for a number of
[Guest]: years, it's not an easy society for an outsider. We all talk about, you know, the US being this
[Guest]: great melting pot. But essentially, it's a country when you look at its history over the last 500
[Guest]: years, it's been a country, a history riven with a lot of conflict, a lot of assimilation in a
[Guest]: violent sense. Also, when you think of what happened to Native Americans, you think of
[Guest]: despite the fact that their Declaration of Independence and all the precepts of their
[Guest]: Constitution, which have inspired many countries, including us around the world. But, you know,
[Guest]: you think of the history of slavery, you think of the history of racial discrimination that
[Guest]: continues in many parts of the country even today. And you think of an immigrant, particularly from
[Guest]: India, brown skinned, like us looking different, you know, from the Caucasian, you know,
[Guest]: majority, because they are basically a white majority country. And think of the history from
[Guest]: the 1920s. You think of people, the early Indian immigrants, how they were classified,
[Guest]: the rights that were denied to them. And it's been a long and checkered history. So I always
[Guest]: related to what it means to go and work in a country where essentially, I suppose, it's an
[Guest]: open society. And, you know, it is a wealthy, well endowed country. And a lot of people from
[Guest]: our part of the world who want to improve their lives never want to go there, because it will
[Guest]: help their children and enable them to go up in the world. But, you know, it's not an easy
[Guest]: that not an easy assimilation, particularly if you come from India, where you've had a
[Guest]: you're an excellent student, you have a great medical degree, engineering degree, but you
[Guest]: have grown up in a sheltered environment in a very traditional society. And generations of
[Guest]: your family have lived that way. And then you're just put into this and you tend to take cover,
[Guest]: you want a certain protection, you want a certain, you know, shelter for yourself,
[Guest]: literally, from all that is going around, you want to succeed in that society, you do very well,
[Guest]: you make money, you build a beautiful house, your children go to the best universities, but this
[Guest]: becomes your sucker, your shelter, you come back and, you know, it's your little community of
[Guest]: friends, many of them from similar backgrounds, small towns, small cities, and it's very difficult
[Guest]: to change. And we are a society that doesn't change easily, you know, for generations, we are
[Guest]: kind of eternal India. And that doesn't get out of you so fast, your children change. And I always
[Guest]: used to say, in the US, when I was ambassador, I want to meet the young Indians, I want to meet the
[Guest]: children of these immigrants, because I know the first generation is us, people like me who've
[Guest]: grown up in the country, and we can't change so easily, because by the age of 15, 16, you're set,
[Guest]: you know, as a person, you may experience a lot more, as you said, but you're set, basically,
[Guest]: in your ways by the time, the way you speak, for instance, doesn't change. I mean, a Henry Kissinger
[Guest]: at 95, today, 96, 97, I mean, he still speaks with that heavy German accent, even to this day,
[Guest]: because you don't really, so I don't, in a sense, you know, question the fact that the NRIs don't
[Guest]: change, or they have certain views. And I can be quite accommodating when it comes to that,
[Guest]: because I've dealt with people like that. And I felt basically, the Indian is quite a reasonable
[Guest]: person, provided you address that, address them as equals. I think, you know, many of them, when
[Guest]: they come to the US and try to integrate themselves, or, you know, work in that country, it's not an
[Guest]: easy experience, not at all an easy experience. So, and we are not a westernized, I often
[Guest]: talk about westernization and modernization. Now, westernization is not just wearing all the clothes
[Guest]: that, you know, especially today, a younger generation has become so westernized in the,
[Guest]: even our movies and all you see. But inside, are we really a modern country? Are we really sort of
[Guest]: giving up, you know, some of the things that perhaps, in a way, separated us? Were questions
[Guest]: of difference, which perhaps, in a sense, we need to dial down a little, if we have to integrate
[Guest]: ourselves. In Latin America, that integration between the native population and the Spanish
[Guest]: culture that came, perhaps happened, both these cultures kind of converged. I don't think that
[Guest]: happened with us, because we had an India that stayed in a certain way. It was our protection,
[Guest]: our shelter, perhaps, our capacity to endure. But that capacity to endure when you go into another
[Guest]: society, I think you have to kind of moderate it in a way that, yes, you're proud of where you come
[Guest]: from and what you stand for, but you should be able to interpret that country to the rest of the
[Guest]: world with much more confidence and much more, you should be more comfortable in your own skin,
[Guest]: I feel. What you said about, you know, the native people and those who came after that kind of
[Amit Varma]: converging in South America, the different people can converge, feels very poignant to me, because
[Amit Varma]: I grew up believing that it's happened in India, that we've converged, we are the Kichri, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and some things might stand out, but we are the Kichri. But I now think of it and I don't think
[Amit Varma]: that convergence ever happened, that if a Hindu ate biryani, it's a Kichri, and if a Hindu ate
[Amit Varma]: biryani, it didn't happen, that if a Hindu ate biryani, it didn't mean that, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: convergence had happened, that, you know, if a Muslim played Holi with you or whatever, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: these are facile cliches, but it didn't mean that convergence had happened. And that's kind of sad.
[Amit Varma]: And the big learning from what you just said, therefore, to all young Indians who are looking
[Amit Varma]: to go abroad is don't go to the US, go to Peru. And I would add to that, take a guava with you,
[Guest]: Peru. I'm sorry. But Peru is the home of the potato, which aloo is our staple.
[Guest]: Aloo is our staple. The International Potato Research Institute is in Lima, actually.
[Guest]: They have thousands of varieties of potatoes. That was the first place I discovered purple
[Guest]: potatoes, in fact, potatoes of all colors. Wow. And do purple potatoes taste the same?
[Amit Varma]: They're quite nice, actually. Yeah. And you almost found yourself in the middle
[Amit Varma]: of a terrorist attack there. Tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: Yes, I went to the birthday reception of the Japanese emperor at the Japanese embassy in Peru
[Guest]: in December 1996. And I stayed there for about half an hour and I had to go somewhere after that.
[Guest]: So the Israeli ambassador was a friend and I left because we had another function to attend.
[Guest]: And three minutes later, we heard, I mean, cell phones had just come in at that time,
[Guest]: and I had a cell phone and I heard somebody call me from the embassy and told me, my embassy,
[Guest]: and told me that this had happened. And are you safe? I mean, I said, I've left already.
[Guest]: So there were about 600 guests at that reception and they were all taken hostage by this
[Guest]: group of terrorists, the Tupac Amaru, who were demanding the release of some of their
[Guest]: leaders who were in prison in Peru at that time. So for four months that took continued,
[Guest]: this hostage situation continued. Some of the hostages were released, but a group of the VIP,
[Guest]: VVIP people were held there, including the foreign minister of Peru, in fact.
[Guest]: So I just left a hair's breadth by a hair's breadth. Otherwise, I would have been part of this,
[Guest]: this whole experience. It ended four months later in April, 1997, when the government of President
[Guest]: Alberto Fujimori launched a surprise attack. Actually, they dug a tunnel from a mile away,
[Guest]: right underground, which opened up in the living room of the embassy. They blasted their way into
[Guest]: the living room of the embassy. At a time when, through their intelligence, they knew that all
[Guest]: the hostages were taking their afternoon nap. It was a big mansion, so they were upstairs.
[Guest]: And only the terrorists were in the drawing room of the embassy playing football, you know.
[Guest]: Foosball.
[Guest]: Foosball, as they say. You can play football inside. I don't know what it's called. There's
[Guest]: some name for it. Anyway, they were playing foosball, and the rescuers, the special troops or
[Guest]: whatever, blasted their way and killed each and every one of those terrorists. Not one hostage
[Guest]: was harmed. And that is a magnificent rescue. And so I lived through all that in Peru, and I was
[Guest]: witness to.
[Amit Varma]: I'm glad you left just in time, because from the little that I'm coming to know of you,
[Amit Varma]: my feeling is you might have been playing foosball with them.
[Guest]: Not with terrorists, no. I don't think so. I may not have been, but it would have been quite
[Guest]: an experience. One would have been able to perhaps write a book about a completely extraordinary
[Guest]: situation and something that hasn't happened since, and I hope it will not. But these are the
[Guest]: risks that one is exposed to. Talking of risks in diplomatic life, this is one. And timing is
[Guest]: very important. If I had not left at that time, so you go somewhere and you stay as just as much
[Guest]: what you need to in terms of time, and you leave and not to linger. There's no room for
[Guest]: deliance in diplomacy, I think. You have to leave. You have to have a sense of timing. That compass,
[Guest]: I don't know, instinct. We were told about instinct. I don't know what it was, but I left
[Guest]: three months, three minutes before this happened. So similarly, I suppose in Sri Lanka, when I was
[Guest]: first secretary there, we had the race riots, the ethnic riots that initially were a kind,
[Guest]: that was kind of a prelude to the civil war. So witness to these very historical events,
[Guest]: Perudas in Sri Lanka that later on as High Commissioner being there during the tsunami again.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I had a narrow miss once where on the night of the terrorist attacks in Bombay,
[Amit Varma]: on that evening, a bunch of us were at an art opening in town, and we don't get out much,
[Amit Varma]: but we were there. So we said, okay, let's go for dinner. Where do we go? And we said,
[Amit Varma]: okay, two choices. Let's either go to Wasabi at the Taj, or let's go to All Star Fry at
[Amit Varma]: Gordon House Hotel. And we chose All Star Fry. And Wasabi, of course, was where I think half
[Amit Varma]: the people there died. And I think the novelist Sonia Falero, who's been on my show was there,
[Amit Varma]: my journalist friend Rahul Bhatia was there. So there were a bunch of us. And it was interesting,
[Amit Varma]: because in All Star Fry, the attack started outside and there was a fog of information,
[Amit Varma]: people are running around with machine guns, someone said that there's a gang war. So there
[Amit Varma]: was all kinds of rumors going around. And the hotel just said, don't go now. All Star Fry is
[Amit Varma]: in this hotel called the Gordon House Hotel. And they gave us a room there for the night. So the
[Amit Varma]: six of us just kind of stayed in that room for the night. And the next morning, they refused to
[Amit Varma]: take any money for it, which was quite lovely. But to sort of get back to diplomacy, the next
[Amit Varma]: question that then intrigues me is that there must have been times where you find yourself,
[Amit Varma]: you earlier spoke of taking the party line, there must have been times where you are taking a party
[Amit Varma]: line that you're not comfortable with, or that you feel that this is the wrong thing to do,
[Amit Varma]: or whatever. And I guess there are two impulses. And of course, the professional thing is you put
[Amit Varma]: your feelings aside, and you just do what you have to do to the best of your whatever. But does that
[Amit Varma]: then diminish your enthusiasm for the job? And does it also lead to a situation where to rationalize
[Amit Varma]: what you're having to do, you then become apolitical, in the sense that because you are
[Amit Varma]: representing the Indian government, no matter which party happens to be running it at that point
[Amit Varma]: in time. And therefore, you just become apolitical and stop having opinions, because you know that
[Amit Varma]: you have to do your job. And your personal liking or disliking for whoever a minister or prime
[Amit Varma]: minister may be can't come in the way you're representing India, you got to do what you got
[Amit Varma]: to do. But as you're representing India, you may not often be acting in what you feel is India's
[Amit Varma]: best interest, you might be following the party line. So have there been occasions where that
[Amit Varma]: situation has happened? For example, you know, you went back to Sri Lanka as the ambassador many,
[Amit Varma]: many years later, you know, you're dealing with Tamils who at some level, would feel that India
[Amit Varma]: let them down, that first you support the LTT and you do whatever and then you just let them down
[Amit Varma]: and you do whatever you do. And how does one handle a situation like that, where you can feel
[Amit Varma]: incredibly sympathetic towards these people, you might even at some level feel bad for the things
[Amit Varma]: that you now have to defend. So, you know, tell me a little bit, have you faced situations like
[Guest]: that? How have you dealt with it? I think in the context of Sri Lanka,
[Guest]: I think there was never any question of our, while we were always insistent on the maintenance of the
[Guest]: unity and integrity of Sri Lanka, we didn't support separatism. We never wanted, you know,
[Guest]: the country to separate or be partitioned or we didn't want that. We wanted a united,
[Guest]: integral Sri Lanka, but at the same time, a concern for the situation that the minorities
[Guest]: faced, especially the Tamils. And after a point, I think they suffered from both sides. In the
[Guest]: sense, even the LTT made the Tamil population suffer in that country after a certain point,
[Guest]: as the civil war crescendo arose and, you know, situations like that happened. I think I tried to
[Guest]: navigate this, although it was difficult. I kept in touch with civil society or whatever remained
[Guest]: of it in the north and east of the country, especially after the tsunami. I travelled
[Guest]: to each and every part, even to Jaffna and, you know, areas as remote as Point Pedro,
[Guest]: right on the north of the peninsula, Batticaloa, Ampara, Trincomalee, all these areas, which were
[Guest]: kind of out of bounds to Indian diplomats because of the civil war, but the tsunami opened it up.
[Guest]: So I utilized that to reach out to people and to convey that at the human level, at the level of
[Guest]: people to people, you know, our concerns for them remained intact and that we would work for their
[Guest]: welfare. So did a lot of welfare related projects there and including some renovation of temples,
[Guest]: you know, Hindu temples and so, delivery of medicines, then helping them, helping Tamil
[Guest]: kids with scholarships to study in India. So you find a way to kind of do what you can under the
[Guest]: circumstances, but then sometimes you're constrained by the system because I remember
[Guest]: during the Agra summit with Pakistan in 2001, when I had just become spokesperson, I'd like to
[Guest]: come back to this whole thing about us needing to be more proactive than reactive in our
[Guest]: communication. And we were entirely reactive during that summit. You know, we hardly spoke to
[Guest]: the media, which was all gathered in Agra during the Agra summit. And I think that lack of
[Guest]: communication did cost the government of India in terms of how the media spoke about the summit
[Guest]: and people were quick to condemn, you know, that we had failed. But if we had been a little more
[Guest]: proactive and been able to disseminate information in a timely way as to what was happening, we
[Guest]: didn't have to divulge state secrets. I'm not saying that, but I think we should in communication
[Guest]: have that confidence through which we emphasize our credibility in reaching out to the media and
[Guest]: being able to guide the narrative. And that sometimes I felt, you know, was sad as Mr. Jaswant
[Guest]: Singh, our foreign minister at that time said, there were too many midwives, but the baby was
[Guest]: stillborn. And we could have avoided that. We end up in a situation where there are often too many
[Guest]: midwives, you know, but the person who's actually supposed to guide the birth perhaps should be a
[Guest]: should be a little more active, more proactive in guiding the narrative. I felt constrained.
[Guest]: And I was spokesperson also, since we can be frank, during the Gujarat riots. And I had to
[Guest]: kind of speak to the international media, sort of, in a sense, trying to put the whole thing
[Guest]: narrative. I'm not, you know, defending anything that happened there. Because I, as a diplomat,
[Guest]: I was not, you know, in the center of those things. But our duty was to project to the
[Guest]: international media that Indian democracy was thriving, and that steps were being taken to
[Guest]: restore, you know, this peace in these disturbed situations. And it was not easy, because you see,
[Guest]: we were in a world where media was already 24-7, information was coming from everywhere.
[Guest]: And to be able to put out something that was, you know, reinforcing the central truth about India,
[Guest]: respecting diversity, being inclusive, being a stable society, became a task that, a complex task.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there is that old cliche about whatever you say about India, the opposite is also true.
[Amit Varma]: But in a moment like that, you know, you're not focusing on the opposite, you're, you know,
[Amit Varma]: something like that has happened. Was it difficult then? Was it like, are there, for example,
[Amit Varma]: meetings of you guys, where you sit down and you decide, okay, how do we craft a narrative for this?
[Amit Varma]: How do we sort it out? Like, do the orders come from above that this is a narrative we wanted to
[Amit Varma]: push? Or do you sit and think that, oh, no, okay, we've got to make India look good. That's our job.
[Amit Varma]: How do we craft a narrative where, you know, we can make it work like that? Because I can just,
[Amit Varma]: thinking aloud, off the top of my head, I can see multiple narratives, which you can plausibly give
[Amit Varma]: to the international community. You could, for example, say that this is an aberrant incident,
[Amit Varma]: it's not all that it's made out to be. Sure, there was a riot, but we've got it under control. And
[Amit Varma]: hey, look at our record for inclusiveness. That's one narrative. The other narrative would be that
[Amit Varma]: what happened is a great tragedy. And we are going to look at it, and we are going to sort it out.
[Amit Varma]: And we are going to make sure it never happens again, because, hey, we are India, you know,
[Amit Varma]: shit happens, but we'll get past it. But I have a feeling that that second narrative would not be
[Amit Varma]: palatable to the powers that be, because it would be, you know, accepting that something very wrong
[Amit Varma]: had happened, you know, which politicians will never obviously want to do. And that's true of
[Amit Varma]: all parties, you know, you see that across all of that. So, take me through then a little bit of
[Amit Varma]: that thinking about that process. And also, when you craft a narrative, is there a danger that
[Guest]: you start believing that narrative? Yes, I understand what you mean. You know,
[Guest]: that, when I recall those days, and both, I mean, the Agra Summit before that, the takeaway
[Guest]: that one gets is that in our system, and as a society, as, you know, Indians, you know,
[Guest]: we're very good with the entertainment that we put out. Look at Bollywood, look at, I mean,
[Guest]: a certain sense of spectacle and people, you know, love it. But when it comes to defining
[Guest]: and describing the narrative, or what kind of direction you want people's understanding
[Guest]: to take, I think we perhaps have to cultivate within ourselves and as a system, more emphasis
[Guest]: on these aspects of governance, and of modulating, I wouldn't say we should enforce it,
[Guest]: but being able to modulate, being able to put out, through careful consideration,
[Guest]: through careful thought, the message that we feel can somehow not only improve people's
[Guest]: understanding of the subject, but also deal with rumor, conjecture, false news.
[Guest]: I think we have to devote so much more attention to it. Even today, I feel it's important for us,
[Guest]: reputationally, abroad, particularly, internationally, as the world's largest
[Guest]: democracy, and to my mind, as a patriot, the world's greatest democracy also. Just think,
[Guest]: you know, 1.3 billion people, and the way we live in an essentially stable country,
[Guest]: essentially stable. We have, you know, eruptions, and we have, you know, unfortunate events that
[Guest]: take place, as they do everywhere in the world. But I think, you know, this essential stability,
[Guest]: the capacity to endure, this resilience of Indian society, of Indian people, and the essential
[Guest]: common sense of our population, which enables the, you know, most people want peace, most people
[Guest]: don't want division, most people want to live in, you know, in harmony with their neighbors. I think
[Guest]: that is the compass to which we are set. And if we are able to put that message out, even if it's
[Guest]: repetitive, even if it's just two, three lines on a piece of paper that everybody repeats, then
[Guest]: it becomes a kind of a message that people also understand better, especially abroad.
[Amit Varma]: I can totally see why you were such a legendary spokesperson. You know, just two counter thoughts
[Amit Varma]: that come to mind is, I would say that, yeah, there's been stability, but I fear that a lot
[Amit Varma]: of it is inertia and apathy, rather than anything else. And also, you know, more than a greatest,
[Amit Varma]: more than the greatest democracy, I'd like us to be the greatest republic. Because that's what
[Amit Varma]: indicates that the rights of every individual. Absolutely. You said it. Absolutely. Yeah.
[Guest]: Yeah. And those are the things I worry about. And this ability to face the light. I mean,
[Guest]: you know, you've heard of Plato's cave. If you're in the cave too long, I mean, you get
[Guest]: used to certain lighting, certain illumination. But when you actually go out into the open,
[Guest]: you don't want to sort of, the light blinds you, I think. We have to constantly be out in the open,
[Amit Varma]: I feel. Get out of our caves. You know, and thinking of the way you've described in the
[Amit Varma]: past, how you became the spokesperson, it feels to me that you are someone who's always entering
[Amit Varma]: Plato's cave from outside and people inside are like, what's going on? Like you've spoken about
[Amit Varma]: how, you know, when you were the first woman spokesperson of the MEA. Yeah, still today,
[Amit Varma]: I think. Till today. And when you were being considered for the post, all these stereotypes
[Amit Varma]: came up that, oh, these parties with the press will have cigarettes, smoke, liquors flowing,
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. But Jaswant Singh supported you, you know, and said that, no, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if she's good at her job, she's good at her job, period. And we'll kind of manage. You also
[Amit Varma]: mentioned and every publisher listening to the show, kindly listen to the next few words really,
[Amit Varma]: really carefully. Because Nirupama has said that she could write a book about the Agra Summit of
[Amit Varma]: 2001. It was so dramatic. And so much happened. You've spoken about how what was supposed to be
[Amit Varma]: a retreat became a carnival. You've spoken about, you know, just the media overreach was so much
[Amit Varma]: that it was like, and I love this phrase by you, conducting foreign policy in an amphitheater.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And you speak about the big communications error for which it all fell apart, where Sushma
[Amit Varma]: Swaraj, who was the External Affairs Minister. Not external, Information and Broadcasting.
[Amit Varma]: Information and Broadcasting Minister, sorry. She was asked that, oh, did you discuss Kashmir? And
[Amit Varma]: she innocently said no. And there was a furor in Pakistan because, hey, how can Kashmir not
[Amit Varma]: be discussed? And then Musharraf had this breakfast meeting with the Indian editors,
[Guest]: and he said, it's only Kashmir. We will talk about nothing else.
[Guest]: And forget about terror and all that. And everything falls apart. And from a
[Amit Varma]: diplomat's point of view, this would have been like politicians and media are destroying our
[Amit Varma]: game. Because, you know, everything like this is not how diplomacy is kind of conducted. And
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about that period of time, because then one begins to wonder
[Amit Varma]: if a diplomat would then feel that the essential nature of diplomacy itself is shifting,
[Amit Varma]: because many of the things that you would talk about in closed rooms,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in confidence with diplomats talking to other diplomats, it suddenly,
[Amit Varma]: it becomes electoral issues, it becomes emotive issues, it kind of goes out there.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, even in Agra, you said it's the only time in your life you were manhandled
[Amit Varma]: by Pakistani journalists. Tell me a little bit about that experience, firstly.
[Guest]: Yeah. Actually, those two Pakistani journalists who manhandled me were clearly,
[Guest]: I think they were from the Pakistan Observer, which they say is an ISI kind of influenced or
[Guest]: directed production. So, they manhandled me and they said, is this what you mean by your Jamuriyat?
[Guest]: You have sent a leader away, Musharraf had left without any conclusion. So, that was very
[Guest]: unfortunate. Of course, the Pakistanis apologised to me. In all fairness, I must also put that on
[Guest]: record. But yes, it was an unnerving experience, that entire Agra summit, things could have been
[Guest]: done differently. Again, it comes back to the central, the message is the medium, you know,
[Guest]: the message is the medium. And I think we must pay much more attention to it because,
[Guest]: and learn from the way, look at the way, you know, they do it in the US or in these open societies.
[Guest]: We don't have to follow other examples. But, you know, we need to be much more out there,
[Guest]: you know, communicating and communicating in a sophisticated way, in a way that is,
[Guest]: you know, international, that is not just couched in the language we are. And we should
[Guest]: understand that with Pakistan, I don't know what direction our foreign policy can take. We seem to
[Guest]: be stuck in some limbo, I think, when it comes. And this is a country partitioned from us,
[Guest]: like as if a limb of ours was severed. And the connections run so deep between our two countries.
[Guest]: And yet there is so much hate in a divided family. What happens? It's like the Montagues and the
[Guest]: Capulets, literally. And generation after generation, it continues. But I think to myself,
[Guest]: don't we need to look a little beyond this and to see in what direction all this can take us?
[Guest]: And can we avoid disasters, future disasters that may threaten to fall upon us because we are so
[Guest]: divided and we are so unable to craft a policy towards each other that can be much more normal
[Guest]: and much more normalizing? You know, we need a normalizing policy. And right now, we seem to be
[Guest]: stuck. We seem to be stuck. And the Pakistanis have a lot to blame for it. I'm not at all saying
[Guest]: that we are in this situation for no reason. There is a reason why we are in this situation.
[Guest]: And the kind of calamities that have befallen us because of certain policies adopted by Pakistan.
[Guest]: But when can we come about, come away from all that? I mean, I feel that this has to be a constant
[Guest]: effort that, you know, these breakages in communication that seem to be defying the
[Guest]: relationship today cannot do us good in the long run. Cannot, I feel. And it doesn't help for
[Guest]: integration. It doesn't help for, as I said, normalized relations. It doesn't help the people
[Guest]: of either country, I feel. And especially for us being such an open, diverse, plural society,
[Guest]: and we will continue to be that way. I think we need, even if solutions may not be entirely
[Guest]: to the full satisfaction, maybe a balance of dissatisfaction, perhaps. We need that balance
[Guest]: of dissatisfaction that moves towards, you know, some more cooperative approach. Ultimately,
[Guest]: you know, if we are to think of security for this part of the world, even from Afghanistan,
[Guest]: if you look from Afghanistan to Sri Lanka, we need a more cooperative, integrated approach
[Guest]: to security also. Because the security of the subcontinent right now, it has been broken up
[Guest]: into so many parts, but essentially it's meant to cohere together, which it was for millennia,
[Guest]: you know, the way geography brought us together, the way history brought us together, and the way
[Guest]: the communications were laid across this entire expanse from the time of Ashoka. Let us just,
[Guest]: you know, going back, it's not just the time of the British. I'm not just talking of Sher Shah
[Guest]: Suri's Grand Trunk Road. It's much previous to that. Somehow, we seem to have lost that plot,
[Amit Varma]: I feel. Some larger questions. And for one of them, I want to kind of go to a quote from
[Amit Varma]: The Fractured Himalaya, and it's in the context of Tibet, really, but I want to apply to just a
[Amit Varma]: larger context. It applies to India, Pakistan also, where you said, quote, the cultural boundaries
[Amit Varma]: transcend the political boundaries and always overflow, linguistically, culturally, no matter
[Amit Varma]: how much you divide them by McMahon and Durand lines. On both sides, the people were almost the
[Amit Varma]: same. And there was free flow of trade and ideas. And anyone who's been to Pakistan will notice
[Amit Varma]: the similarities. Like when I went to Lahore, it felt so much like Delhi. And this is a cliche.
[Amit Varma]: But when I went to Karachi, it felt so much like Bombay, you know, through all of Pakistan, like
[Amit Varma]: except when I went to Peshawar, I did not feel that I was not in India. Only the signs were in
[Amit Varma]: Urdu. And in Peshawar, of course, it was speaking Pashto and, you know, lighter eyes and all of
[Amit Varma]: that. So they look different. So it wasn't unfriendly. But I, the rest of everywhere else,
[Amit Varma]: I felt like I was kind of in India. And, you know, you've quoted Nehru saying that countries cannot
[Amit Varma]: run from geography. But I think the one little nuance there is that the problem isn't geography,
[Amit Varma]: the problem is nation states in the sense that we draw these borders between people who are
[Amit Varma]: otherwise so similar, like, you know, Tibet is one thing, but there is a greater sense of
[Amit Varma]: Tibet that, you know, and that Buddhism that is all around, you know, and North India has so much
[Amit Varma]: more in common with, say, Pakistan than it does with South India. And there are so many commonalities
[Amit Varma]: that go through. And surely as a diplomat, you obviously you travel everywhere, you see these
[Amit Varma]: commonalities even in far off places like Latin America, and you see these commonalities. And yet,
[Amit Varma]: it almost therefore feels primitive, that we are negotiating the world through the lens of nation
[Amit Varma]: states and the particular nation state that we come from. And of course, anything that is a status
[Amit Varma]: quo always seems inevitable, right? You think it's been there forever, and it will be there forever.
[Amit Varma]: But if you look through the large sweep of history, nation states haven't really been around
[Amit Varma]: for too long. And it is not necessarily the case that the world will look like this 200 years from
[Amit Varma]: now. We don't know that. It is not, there is no permanence about it. But what there is permanence
[Amit Varma]: about is culture, and the commonalities that they have. What there is also permanence about,
[Amit Varma]: like in a different place, you've spoken about how Tibetans in a map would not recognize divisions
[Amit Varma]: within mountains and rivers and whatever. And you've a very eloquent couple of paras by you,
[Amit Varma]: I won't quote them here, I'll just encourage people to read the book. So what do you think
[Amit Varma]: about this aspect? Because at one level, you are a person who is out there. And you are immersing
[Amit Varma]: yourself in all the cultures, you learn German, you learn Spanish, you know, you're learning the
[Amit Varma]: languages. So you know, that sense is there. But at the same time, you are representing one
[Amit Varma]: particular nation state, which when you think about it is such an artificial construct. And
[Amit Varma]: you're representing it against other nation states, which are equally artificial constructs.
[Amit Varma]: And does it ever feel like this is a weird kind of game? Why are we in this game? This whole game
[Guest]: is so, just doesn't make sense. Well, this is one area where one feels, you know, one has to
[Guest]: acknowledge a certain sense of degree of helplessness, because these are ordained,
[Guest]: these are given to you. I mean, you're handed this down. It's like, you know, like some 10
[Guest]: commandments written on stone that you have to deal with, especially when you're in the policy
[Guest]: making framework. And this is what you deal with. You deal with maps, you deal with borderlines,
[Guest]: you deal with, you know, territorial integrity, and the whole issue of sovereignty, which is like
[Guest]: so sacred to us, you know, it's that third rail you don't want to cross, literally. So all of us,
[Guest]: whether we're Indians or Pakistanis or Chinese or Bangladeshis or Sri Lankans or Nepalese,
[Guest]: we have to deal with it. But then other realization, which should be there at the back of
[Guest]: one's mind, is that very often the stories cut across maps. Stories don't stop at the map,
[Guest]: you know. Think of a city like Amritsar. I delivered a lecture on borderlands recently
[Guest]: there at Maja House. And I spoke of this, you know, these are cities like Amritsar. It's very
[Guest]: much like, it's like a city in chrysalis. I always think of it, you know, it's still evolving. It is
[Guest]: still influenced by the currents that cross borders, you know, whether, I mean, politically
[Guest]: or whether culturally or whether historically. I mean, you think of Ranjit Singh, for instance,
[Guest]: and his whole, you know, the extent of his, literally his empire. So you realize that
[Guest]: the sense, the knowledge of history should be ingrained in each and every one of us.
[Guest]: Today, many of our kids, our students go into engineering and compute, study of computers
[Guest]: or medicine. I can understand, you know, every parent wants their child to do well in life.
[Guest]: And these are avenues for advancement, no doubt. And in some senses, as a doctor, you serve society,
[Guest]: which is absolutely laudable. But every child, I think, should have a sense of that history also.
[Guest]: And that awakes the imaginations. You need both reason and you need both imagination,
[Guest]: both of them together, so that you understand the history of the place, which is what I think
[Guest]: was kindled in me as a child. And you can kindle that in every child, I think, that love of history.
[Guest]: And it's through that love of history that you realize the power of integration,
[Guest]: the power of, you know, this organic whole that we are, and which has been severed and dissected
[Guest]: in so many places. So we are bleeding and, you know, and the frontiers in our part of the world
[Guest]: bleed, literally. They're not in that way. We think they are set in stone, but they are bleeding.
[Guest]: And how do we look beyond them? Why can't we have more integration? Why can't we think of,
[Guest]: you know, trade? And why do we have to be, you know, issues like territorial differences and
[Guest]: conflicts will take a very long time to settle. It's not something that we can do overnight.
[Guest]: There's no magic wand that we can wave. But we need that wisdom and foresight to realize that
[Guest]: even as these will take time to resolve, we have to get on with the business of building a better
[Guest]: life for the people involved, which we are not able to do at the moment. Because we are living
[Guest]: in these compartments, we are progressing. There is difference, certainly, in our lives.
[Guest]: But the potential is nowhere near being realized, I feel, because of these divisions.
[Amit Varma]: So my friend Pranay Kotasane, when speaking about Pakistan once in an older episode,
[Amit Varma]: spoke about how we can't think of one Pakistan, there are multiple Pakistan's and
[Amit Varma]: his specific phrasing was, there is a military jihadi complex, and there is a putative state
[Amit Varma]: of Pakistan. And really, and I've always looked at it as that, as well, that this, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the stronger this military jihadi complex is, the worse it is for the citizens of Pakistan,
[Amit Varma]: they are also victims. I think, you know, which is why you also often speak about people to people
[Amit Varma]: contact and the importance of that and all of that. And this seems to flow along the lines
[Amit Varma]: I described earlier, that the people everywhere are united by culture and by cultural similarities,
[Amit Varma]: if not united by culture completely. But the states are thinking of it as nation states,
[Amit Varma]: there are these borders, we have to do what we kind of have to do. And even though you are a
[Amit Varma]: representative of the state in your capacity as a diplomat, you are also a person. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: you have you're also a citizen. In fact, in various ways, including the work you've done
[Amit Varma]: after retirement on your orchestra, which we'll speak about later, you've tried to further people
[Amit Varma]: to people contact because that is the best way to kind of solve these problems. And it might just
[Amit Varma]: be the case that the people in power have an incentive to keep these problems going. After
[Amit Varma]: all, if Pakistan doesn't have trouble in its borders, then you know, how do you justify
[Amit Varma]: spending so much money on the army, for example, you know, in India, if the economy is collapsing,
[Amit Varma]: then the smart thing is to focus your anger on an enemy outside and make that an issue,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so you have different incentives kind of playing out. So now from the vantage point of
[Amit Varma]: where you are, where you have simultaneously been a concerned citizen all your life, and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, dived into every culture and so on. And also you have been part of the state.
[Amit Varma]: So how do you how do you kind of look at this? And do you think that a greater recognition of
[Amit Varma]: this dichotomy would actually help everyone because so many people in India, for example,
[Amit Varma]: are ingrained or brainwashed into just hating Pakistan. But what is hateable there is not
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan. It's it's, you know, a particular kind of state that is out there, but the people are you,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so what are your thoughts? I think every child instead of being ingrained with
[Guest]: the hatred of Pakistan should understand the circumstances in which Pakistan came to be.
[Guest]: And that is why the the penultimate stages of our freedom struggle, particularly from 1935 onwards,
[Guest]: should be studied in much greater precision and detail by all of us as concerned citizens,
[Guest]: because, you know, we think of the overall arch of the freedom struggle of Gandhiji and
[Guest]: Gandhiji and civil disobedience and nonviolence. But, you know, the fine, the finely grained,
[Guest]: high resolution picture of those years from 1935 onwards must be studied. How did Pakistan come to
[Guest]: be? How did our country get divided? Why were certain Muslims of the subcontinent leading this
[Guest]: struggle in the forefront? Did they really represent the interests of all the Muslims?
[Guest]: So there's the whole tragedy of Pakistan. The birth of Pakistan, I think, was in a sense a
[Guest]: result of that, the tragedies of division within our own committee, within our own society, within
[Guest]: our own body politic. And I think if we have that kind of perspective and understand the history
[Guest]: involved, understand the background against which partition happened, the greatest tragedy
[Guest]: of modern times, the displacement of the common man, basically common people. I always say,
[Guest]: think of the unknown Indian, think of the unknown Pakistani. We don't know much about even the
[Guest]: known ones, but unknown ones. I mean, their situations are so, so, you know, they're like
[Guest]: Siamese twins, despite the partition, I feel, joined at the hip and fighting with each other,
[Guest]: struggling with each other, not understanding, you know, the linkages that kept us one for
[Guest]: centuries and then tore us asunder. So I don't think this is a normal foreign policy relationship.
[Guest]: It's a relationship that's tied up so much with our domestic constituencies and our own fabric
[Guest]: as societies, as nations, as peoples, as inter-religious, you know, relationships go.
[Guest]: So I wish we could understand the complexities of these relationships and how these divisions have
[Guest]: continued and become so much more accentuated rather than having, division should have healed
[Guest]: by now, you know, we should have been, but then we had Kashmir, the whole struggle over Kashmir,
[Guest]: and then the usage by the military junta in Pakistan of these proxy methods of cross-border
[Guest]: terrorism and, and policies, not policies, maneuvers, tactics, stratagems to, to foment
[Guest]: more division between the two countries. So India can't be faulted for the efforts that it made
[Guest]: over the decades to try and build peace, but Pakistan through its, especially, of course,
[Guest]: the policies of the military dictatorships has managed to create the mess that we're in today.
[Guest]: It's a total pickle, I think.
[Amit Varma]: And taking off from this, it seems to me that many problems in international affairs are actually
[Amit Varma]: intractable, just unsolvable. You can't do anything about it. The India-Pakistan problem
[Amit Varma]: is obviously one problem, because each country has taken a hard stand on something, and there
[Amit Varma]: is no meeting point possible. Israel, Palestine is like that, even in, you know, our problem with
[Amit Varma]: China, which you described in such detail, you know, even the matter of Tibet, it's intractable,
[Amit Varma]: because India is saying that, hey, you know, we are the successors to the British Empire,
[Amit Varma]: as it were, so those agreements hold. Simla Pact of 1914 says, these are the borders, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: China is saying, hey, we never recognized that. And we have a different conception of the thing.
[Amit Varma]: And there's absolutely no meeting point. And maybe there are moments in time, where you can take a
[Amit Varma]: step and things can happen. But if that moment in time passes, then it's just Groundhog Day.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me, therefore, that in, as far as these problems are concerned,
[Amit Varma]: you could replace the diplomats with AI, right? You could just build a machine,
[Amit Varma]: and you program the machine, and machines say the same thing, they say the same thing,
[Amit Varma]: each machine on each side will argue, you are fed in with how far you can go, and you can't go
[Amit Varma]: further than that. And all of that. And of course, you make a difference on many other margins,
[Amit Varma]: such as repatriating stateless people and all of that. But as far as these big problems are
[Amit Varma]: concerned, they kind of become unsolvable. And it's essentially a dance. And it's a dance where
[Amit Varma]: everybody knows what is going to happen. Because you have certain levers of public policy,
[Amit Varma]: your counterpart may have certain other levers, you know how far each lever will work. So it's
[Amit Varma]: almost like the people are irrelevant, you know, the machine just kind of runs itself and Groundhog
[Amit Varma]: Day, right? So has that ever been a sense that you have got that this is futile? You know,
[Amit Varma]: what can one do here? Like whenever one does something, like if I do a podcast, right,
[Amit Varma]: I'll try to put my personality into it, make it something of me. If I play a sport, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Virat Kohli will play the sport in a particular way. Whatever you do, you kind of try to do it
[Amit Varma]: in your own way and put something of yours in it. But diplomacy, it also seems to me that what is
[Amit Varma]: required is really the opposite, that deviations might be a bug and not a feature that you just go
[Amit Varma]: with the program. And so on the one hand, you're an independent thinking person, you are immersing
[Amit Varma]: yourself in your own ways, you're meeting people, you're building rapport, you're building
[Amit Varma]: relationships. But on the other hand, there are these guardrails. So what are sort of your thoughts
[Guest]: on this? Yeah, I think that very much there is a programmed diplomacy that you are handed down
[Guest]: and have to deal with and operate within, you know, those confines, the so called guardrails,
[Guest]: or maybe I would say third rails, you don't cross them. So that definitely is something that all of
[Guest]: us have to contend with. And many of us just accept it and, you know, operate on that basis.
[Guest]: And we kind of repeat the mantras and, you know, know that you don't cross borders, as it were,
[Guest]: there's no crossing certain lines. I think, yes, especially, that's especially the case with us.
[Guest]: And I don't know what that portends for the future. Because, you know, for and obviously,
[Guest]: as Indians, we all want our country to be on the global high table, we want to become permanent
[Guest]: members of the UN Security Council, we want to be recognized as a leading power. But you know,
[Guest]: as a citizen, I can say that now I'm not, I'm, you know, I speak out more on these issues,
[Guest]: my own view, based on my experiences that we cannot achieve, we can certainly aspire,
[Guest]: but we can say we cannot achieve those heights of greatness that we aspire to,
[Guest]: unless we are able to message the outside world and convey to the outside world that here we are
[Guest]: as the biggest country in the region, we are taking the initiatives to open up things to
[Guest]: resolve historical problems, and to overcome prejudice. And, you know, to be as a democratic,
[Guest]: as a republic, you mentioned the democratic society that we are really able to walk the talk
[Guest]: on all that we stand for. And I think that that should be also something at the back of our minds,
[Guest]: especially at the leadership level, I think that political will has to imbue these,
[Guest]: these aims and aspirations. It's not just talking about them at every annual session of the UN
[Guest]: General Assembly, or the speech that our representative makes at the Security Council.
[Guest]: I think that we have to be not only a voice for that, but we also have to be seen as doers,
[Guest]: you know, as action oriented in the direction of that inclusiveness that we stand for. And that
[Guest]: sense of integration that we have always espoused when it comes to the rest of the world. We are
[Guest]: for the end of conflict, we want peaceful solutions. Our representative talking about Ukraine
[Guest]: is saying we need constructive diplomacy. We don't want conflict, we cannot afford the wages of war.
[Guest]: But we're not saying it in our region. I'm not, I don't mean vis-a-vis China,
[Guest]: I mean, there China is the bigger country, I think has to be much more magnanimous.
[Amit Varma]: Is foreign policy constrained in a sense by domestic policy? And I mean this in two ways.
[Amit Varma]: One is my friend Nitin Pai says, and I agree with him 100%. He says that, you know, the best
[Amit Varma]: foreign policy is a growing economy, right? Because you get GDP growth, you have more trade,
[Amit Varma]: bigger markets, you have a better lever to use in your foreign policy. And these levers matter.
[Amit Varma]: That's one aspect of domestic policy mattering. Because if you're a poor country, if you're all
[Amit Varma]: over the place, no one's going to take you seriously. And the other aspect of it is that
[Amit Varma]: you can go on international forums and say all of these things. But then those international
[Amit Varma]: forums can say, hey, but look what you're doing in India, you're talking about inclusiveness.
[Amit Varma]: But look what's happened in Gujarat, or look what's happening in Karnataka over the hijab thing
[Amit Varma]: and look at blah, blah, blah. And then where do you stand? And, you know, so at these different
[Amit Varma]: levels, necessarily, if you're part of the foreign policy establishment, not just a diplomat,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps like yourself, or a foreign policy bureaucrat, but even a minister, they might,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, be powerless, because you have the levers you have, and you have nothing else.
[Guest]: And that is what it is. I agree that it has to really emanate top down. It can't be a bottom
[Guest]: up sort of, you know, movement in that sense, because these things, the messaging has to come
[Guest]: really, from the top, there has to be a conscious deliberation, a conscious determination,
[Guest]: conscious sense of direction that we are able to give. So maybe that moment of realization,
[Guest]: I hope it will be there. Because I've always operated on the principle that we are a
[Guest]: reasonable set of people. I think it is there, we are programmed as what we are, to be reasonable
[Guest]: and to be common sense oriented in whatever we do. So that's really what our religion teaches.
[Guest]: Hinduism, by and large, means that it doesn't, it is not rigid, it is accommodative. It is able to
[Guest]: evolve, you know, it doesn't stand in one place in that sense. And I think we must,
[Guest]: that absent that sense of rigidity, you know, exclude it from the debate, and be prepared to
[Guest]: incorporate new ideas of thinking constantly. Because there, I think the kernel of greatness
[Guest]: lies in that ability to change, to evolve, to assimilate, to accommodate. And in the process,
[Guest]: the sum of the parts becomes so much more than each individual.
[Amit Varma]: And a third domestic problem just struck me, which is political rhetoric, especially in times like
[Amit Varma]: this, where like earlier, you've pointed out that, you know, there is one theory that the reason
[Amit Varma]: Mao was quick to go to war in 1962, was because the great leap forward of, you know, three years
[Amit Varma]: before that, had completely failed. I mean, the big summary there is that sparrows were destroying
[Amit Varma]: crops. So he wanted, you know, he ordered that all sparrows should be killed and locusts proliferated,
[Amit Varma]: and it was just madness and one, you know, unseen effect upon another, and tens of millions of
[Amit Varma]: people basically died. And therefore, he knows because he's messed up domestically, you know,
[Amit Varma]: an external enemy is a good thing, you know, and therefore it works. And this is one theory,
[Amit Varma]: obviously, it's not the only reason he went to war there was, you know, it's it's so much else.
[Amit Varma]: But similarly, in India, you know, this can, this can lead to rhetoric, which gets in the way of the
[Amit Varma]: diplomacy that diplomats might be trying to carry out. For example, you know, I had Shivam Shankar
[Amit Varma]: Singh on the show recently, who's the who was in the BJP for a short while and as an election
[Amit Varma]: analyst and a strategist who also was in IPAC for a short while where he got Amrindar Singh
[Amit Varma]: elected in the Congress campaign. And he said that the day he left the BJP was when at one point,
[Amit Varma]: they decided consciously as a campaign choice that, you know, and this was for the 2019 elections,
[Amit Varma]: and they decided that we are going to build a narrative of othering and anti Muslim narrative
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. Because last time we did a narrative of economy and we have nothing to
[Amit Varma]: show for it. Right. Now, it strikes me that with 2024 coming, it might even be therefore a rational
[Amit Varma]: thing to say for them from a political and electoral perspective, how do we get votes
[Amit Varma]: that if you have nothing to show domestically, things are so bad, you know, build up the
[Amit Varma]: specter of the foreign enemy. So at one level, you have this kind of narrative going down for
[Amit Varma]: the benefit of a domestic audience. But on the other hand, China is listening. But on the other
[Amit Varma]: hand, Pakistan is listening and Pakistan is listening is okay, but China is listening.
[Amit Varma]: They're way more powerful than you, you know, if China and India were to go to war today,
[Amit Varma]: it wouldn't end well for us, right? So, you know, so when when you guys your sort of diplomatic
[Amit Varma]: community, when you sit and you see what the hell is happening in the world, there's so much
[Amit Varma]: populism, it's not just India, it's kind of happening everywhere. You know, someone you've
[Amit Varma]: met many, many times Xi Jinping is also going off on more and more in more and more aggressive
[Amit Varma]: directions. And you must also tell us about your encounters with him and how you found that. But
[Amit Varma]: is this something that makes you despair sometimes? That what can I do at the foreign
[Amit Varma]: policy level, where all of this political rhetoric for domestic consumption makes my
[Guest]: task virtually impossible? Yeah, I'm not in the system anymore. So I suppose yes, it would have
[Guest]: meant being, you know, the space within which you operate becomes much more confined today by all
[Guest]: that is going on domestically, because you can't separate the domestic context in which we operate
[Guest]: as a republic as a democracy from the foreign context in which we operate on the global stage.
[Guest]: We seem to think that we can impose these divisions, these compartments, we but I don't
[Guest]: think we can operate in those silos anymore, because the world sees us. I mean, we're there
[Guest]: an open book, however much we may try to, you know, impose restrictions on the way our media
[Guest]: talks in the country, for instance, I mean, a certain line is put out. And if you're an
[Guest]: unquestioning citizen, you accept that and you think things are going well. And there's really
[Guest]: all is well, as they said in the three idiots, I think all is well, yes. So it's, it's only I think
[Guest]: we all need to, you know, they talk of the examined life, what is the examined life today,
[Guest]: I think, and you talked about what do we have to show for six or seven years of certain parties
[Guest]: rule, I think, we need that self examination, I think we need that kind of probity within
[Guest]: ourselves, that honesty, I think. And what is it we want for the country? Do we want the,
[Guest]: the redressal as we see it of historic wrongs that we as a majority community have had to
[Guest]: have become have been victims of or whatever the rights or wrongs may be there or whatever the
[Guest]: the true flow of history may have been in that connection. Yes, we did suffer, there's no doubt
[Guest]: there's no doubt we were conquered. We were victims of historic circumstance. But there is a
[Guest]: larger context of our capacity to endure through all this that resilience and, and which really
[Guest]: speaks to the the strength and the health of a society that was able to endure through all this
[Guest]: and come out, you know, with the last man standing literally, you know, at the end of it all. So
[Guest]: we don't think in those ways, if we create the sense of victimhood, then I think we lose sight
[Guest]: of the goals that we need for the country. We need modernization. How do we define modernization?
[Guest]: It's just not adopting rap music, or, you know, wearing blue jeans, or, you know, you look at,
[Guest]: as I said earlier, you look at our films today, I mean, I really wonder what the messaging is,
[Guest]: I think the messaging has got all confused. Modernization really means, you know, the best
[Guest]: roads, the best infrastructure, the best universities, the best schools, tell me, you
[Guest]: know, we had this entire campaign against corruption in the country, and we were all witness to it. And
[Guest]: I think a lot of us, we don't want corruption, obviously, we want it eliminated. But why is it
[Guest]: that we don't, when we, I notice, I sometimes feel like I'm a wolf howling at the moon,
[Guest]: when I walk on the roads in my own city here, I mean, in Bangalore, the pavements, you know,
[Guest]: the manholes, the lack of proper waste disposal. I mean, we're trying, there's no doubt the
[Guest]: municipalities are trying, but roads that are repaired within one year, they go back to the
[Guest]: same. This is what people should be talking about. Why is it that drinking water is not safe enough
[Guest]: after 70 years of independence? Why is it that we don't have a road leading to my school in the
[Guest]: village? Or why is it that my children have to walk to school for so long? Why is it that, you
[Guest]: know, I don't have a doctor nearby or a dispensary nearby? These are the things that, you know,
[Guest]: should really concern us. And this is what modernization is. It's not about writing
[Guest]: historic wrongs. I think we've won our freedom today. We have an established constitutional
[Guest]: republic. We have to improve it, no doubt, but that is improvement in governance, improvement
[Guest]: in state capacity, which is so important. When you look at state capacity, you look at this,
[Guest]: you look at how our cities are planned, and that's all about state capacity, I think.
[Guest]: This is what we should be talking of. The debate should be about these countries,
[Guest]: not about the othering, as you said, of, you know, if a girl student coming to college wearing,
[Guest]: you know, a face scarf, I think it's a headscarf, really, what they were wearing,
[Guest]: the face was not covered. But it's still coming to college. It's not coming to a denominational
[Guest]: institution. It's coming to, for a secular education. I think that is important, don't
[Guest]: you think? It's important that that girl has been able to come to that school, is able to ride a
[Guest]: scooter, park it there, come into college, study, wanting to become an architect or a doctor or an
[Guest]: engineer or an architect. That, I think, is what modernization is. It's not about, you know,
[Guest]: however much, you know, wearing a niqab or a burqa may imply in terms of whatever it implies in
[Guest]: terms of the place of women in Islam. That's a whole debate. I mean, it involves the whole Muslim
[Guest]: communities across the world. It need not be confined to India. And we don't have to start
[Guest]: that. It has to, you know, come universally. You need many Ataturks, I think, to begin and
[Guest]: complete that debate. But for us, I think it is to ensure that girls come to school and girls
[Guest]: are educated and girls become financially independent. That's really what modernization
[Guest]: is about. Modernization is about our cities, you know, being able to deliver facilities to the
[Guest]: population. It's about lifting more and more millions of people out of poverty and making
[Guest]: them stand on their own feet, giving them a sense of pride rather than being just dependent on
[Guest]: my baap, literally. I think this is how I define modernization. Yeah, many strands and I agree with
[Amit Varma]: you on everything you said, really. But, you know, you described yourself as a wolf howling at the
[Amit Varma]: moon. I see myself as a wolf howling at the new moon because nobody's listening, right?
[Amit Varma]: Even that anti-corruption thing, like the core cause of corruption is the state has too much
[Amit Varma]: power. You give the state too much power, too much discretion. Corruption is inevitable. As
[Amit Varma]: Lord Acton said, power corrupts, absolute power corrupts. Absolutely, it's inevitable. You need
[Amit Varma]: to change the incentives of the state and that's the only way to kind of get it to work. I also
[Guest]: agree about everything you said. And corruption is not confined to India alone. I mean, I've seen
[Amit Varma]: it in China, even under the communist party. Same thing, big state. Huge. Yeah, the more the more
[Guest]: but the landscape is being transformed. I think, you know, I went to China in 1986 and 40 years
[Guest]: almost down the line. It's as the saying goes, the past is another country. It's another country
[Guest]: that you see today. You never step in the same river twice. Yeah, yeah. I think that is what
[Guest]: should consume us as to how that kind of change happened. You know, it happened, I think,
[Guest]: because a certain of a certain, you know, something consuming the Chinese people, I think,
[Guest]: about wanting to stand up, wanting to be counted, wanting to be modern. I think from
[Guest]: 1919, when the May 4th movement was consuming the students of Peking University and other big
[Guest]: universities. I mean, this was the debate about modernization. I think that debate has not happened.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I agree with you. And, you know, you've, in fact, spoken when you were in China in the
[Amit Varma]: 1980s. And at one point you would, your Indian delegation was taken for a meeting. And this
[Amit Varma]: was after Tiananmen. And the streets were all empty. And it was ghost towns. And it's kind of
[Amit Varma]: no longer like that. I agree with everything you said about the hijab, by the way, like,
[Amit Varma]: I'm in the middle of writing a newsletter post about, which has a headline dial H for hate,
[Amit Varma]: not hijab, which I think is a core problem there. You know, the hijab is a separate issue,
[Guest]: even the constitution. None of us may really, I mean, if I go to, I've been to Iran a number of
[Guest]: times on work, covering my head with the scarf, I'm so unused and uncomfortable about it. And I
[Guest]: used to think how are people, but underneath it all, the Iranian woman had found, you know, she
[Guest]: had a bouffant hairdo under that way, under that headscarf. She, you know, wore high heels. She
[Guest]: was absolutely sophisticated. She was out there in the marketplace, you know, kind of, you know,
[Guest]: doing her shopping, driving her car. We need women who are able to do all this, despite the fact
[Amit Varma]: that they're wearing that, you know. Yeah, I mean, my point here really is that what matters finally
[Amit Varma]: is consent. Now, some women wear the hijab because they want to. Some may not have that full degree
[Guest]: of consent and they wear it because of pressures. Like in Afghanistan today? Yeah, but the point is
[Amit Varma]: that is not the debate here. The core issue here, which we kind of forget and the hijab becomes a
[Amit Varma]: diversion, even talking of the constitution and rights, I think becomes a diversion. The core
[Amit Varma]: issue here is that in our society, there has always been this undercurrent of hate, this
[Amit Varma]: anti-Muslim sentiment. And this is one of many recent expressions of that. And we have to address
[Amit Varma]: that. And what you earlier said that why focus on this, let's focus on better roads, modernization
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. You know, I'm reminded of Nehru's debates with Mohammad Iqbal and Jinnah,
[Amit Varma]: these two separate debates, which were reproduced in this book by Tripur Dhaman Singh and Adil
[Amit Varma]: Hussain. I had an episode with them as well. And Nehru, in fact, for example, took the stand with
[Amit Varma]: Jinnah that the communal problem is an elite problem. We should focus on poverty. And I
[Amit Varma]: think that's a big mistake. I think focusing on poverty is, of course, the key thing to do.
[Amit Varma]: You know, as Gandhi put it, every single thing that you do, you first need to ask,
[Guest]: is it going to benefit the poor? No argument. But simultaneously, you have to solve the communal
[Amit Varma]: issue. You know, and that was, in fact, one area where, you know, Nehru learned some hard lessons,
[Amit Varma]: he was obviously wrong there. And the communal problem exists. And what you see today is,
[Amit Varma]: I don't think this was created by the party in charge. I think it is the other way around
[Amit Varma]: that the causation goes. It's endemic to society. It's endemic to society. It's part of our society.
[Amit Varma]: And the opposite is also true as with everything. But this is what we need to address. And I think
[Amit Varma]: this is a core point. I mean, I agree that I'm sounding apathetic about the economy,
[Amit Varma]: because on the economy, frankly, every government we've ever had has been statist,
[Amit Varma]: barring brief periods of exceptions, maybe. And populism is mixed up very much with that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So, you know, the economy has always been going to hell in India, and it's going to
[Amit Varma]: continue. Besides brief moments where things looked up under Narasimha Rao and Vajpayee.
[Amit Varma]: But it's just hate. It is these fissures in our society, which I kind of worry about a bit more.
[Amit Varma]: And one way of healing these fissures is perhaps through finding common joy in culture. And in
[Amit Varma]: fact, that is, let's talk about your music now, which I'm kind of fascinated by, because
[Amit Varma]: you and your husband decided to sort of set up this what you call the South Asian Symphony
[Amit Varma]: Foundation, and you founded the South Asian Symphony Orchestra. And the reason being that,
[Amit Varma]: listen, you know, we are united culturally in so many ways. And this can sort of be an expression
[Amit Varma]: of that you spoke about the Israel and Palestine doing a similar effort with the East West Diwan
[Amit Varma]: Orchestra, Diwan, of course, being this work by Geetha. So, so tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: your thinking behind this. I mean, these are really two stands, simultaneous stands,
[Amit Varma]: and I want to examine the musical aspect of it, your interest in music, learning opera, all of
[Amit Varma]: that after this, but it's the thought behind it, you know, that we can unite people through culture,
[Amit Varma]: which really intrigues me, because you've got, you know, youngsters from Afghanistan here,
[Amit Varma]: you've got youngsters from all over South Asia, except Pakistan, performing music that is not just
[Amit Varma]: your typical, you know, Western classical music, but I mean, I won't call it fusion either, but
[Amit Varma]: you're also performing indigenous stuff and doing it in your own way. So tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: the thinking behind this, what kind of led you to do this? And if one is to extend that central
[Amit Varma]: principle, or the central sentiment, that music can unite people, that culture can unite people,
[Amit Varma]: that do you think that there, you know, that this is one direction in which we can possibly think
[Guest]: to mitigate everything else that is going wrong? Well, it certainly can't mitigate all the hatred
[Guest]: and division that we see around us, and you and me individually cannot do much about it, I realize
[Guest]: that, but you can certainly be a voice in the wilderness also, which I try to be, and it's a
[Guest]: bit unorthodox, the approach, because we are very embedded in our cultural traditions, and
[Guest]: legitimately so, because there is so much richness in what we have inherited, and what we are as a
[Guest]: civilization and a culture, so I am proud of it. But when I think of integration, I felt that
[Guest]: rather than seeking to dominate the space with one identity, which is Indian, because much of the
[Guest]: culture and the music and all essentially stems from this space, and our neighbors, they like it,
[Guest]: they absorb it, no doubt, but there is always this consciousness at the back of their minds that
[Guest]: India is in a kind of, even a cultural hegemon in some ways, you know, we really are that giant,
[Guest]: that kind of the shadow is cast all over the region, and how do they thrive in that shadow?
[Guest]: That is the dilemma that many of our neighbors face, so they're consciously trying to break out
[Guest]: of it. So I felt if we have this, if I do use music as an integrative tool for this region,
[Guest]: I should try and perhaps, again, this obsession I have also with this whole modernization and
[Guest]: globalization kind of becoming more international. Globalization may be, you know, we have adopted
[Guest]: cricket as our game, we play tennis, competitive tennis, we want to excel in field sports in
[Guest]: Olympics, we've adopted certain idioms, even if, you know, we as a society, we are quite
[Guest]: resistant, I think, to a lot of this kind of opening our doors to foreign influence. There is a
[Guest]: certain, you know, certain attitude and approach we have there. But I felt that even as we can be
[Guest]: proud in our own tradition, we should perhaps bring this region to the world. And the concept
[Guest]: of an orchestra appealed to me, not just because it was a Western concept, not, you know, yes,
[Guest]: they've succeeded very well with the symphony orchestras that they have abroad. But, you know,
[Guest]: the orchestra would bring musicians from our region together and make them sit side by side.
[Guest]: You know, in orchestra, there's a term called desk, you share a desk, literally, you know,
[Guest]: you're with that fellow violinist or fellow trombone player or fellow cellist or clarinet
[Guest]: player. You're rubbing shoulders and you are operating within a discipline that entails
[Guest]: for you to listen to the other person and to sort of calibrate your movements in accordance with
[Guest]: what the other is playing, because otherwise the harmony doesn't happen. Even if you have
[Guest]: a conductor there who's telling you do this and do that, unless you're able to listen, pick up
[Guest]: sounds, cultivate that habit of hear, of the ear, which is the first sense that develops in a fetus
[Guest]: within 40 days of conception. That is the first sense, the sense of hearing. And I think here we
[Guest]: have to, in normal life, in life on earth, we have to inculcate that, particularly in our region,
[Guest]: listen to the other, listen to the other, being able to overcome and through listening, you become
[Guest]: curious about the other person. You want to know more and you begin conversations. My idea was to
[Guest]: begin conversations that would enable certain barriers to be broken down. And I think to that
[Guest]: extent, although we are not a professional orchestra, to become that kind of level that
[Guest]: you hear in the West, it'll take years. We don't have an institution where these people come
[Guest]: together, live for years together and perfect their art. We have not had that kind of opportunity
[Guest]: to develop it in that direction. So what happens now is we invite people to identify them. Itself
[Guest]: was an uphill task. We didn't have a database. Today we have a database of musicians of South
[Guest]: Asian origin. A lot of them are Indian origin, but other countries also, who have some aptitude in
[Guest]: playing in an orchestra. And we are bringing them together. Some of them are world-class,
[Guest]: some of them are middle level, and some are just novices struggling, especially from the region,
[Guest]: because we don't have opportunities for many of these musicians. And in the process, we have tried
[Guest]: to also orchestrate for an orchestra music of the region. And that's how we came up with this
[Guest]: piece of music called Hamsafar, which was really bringing in music from the whole region into an
[Guest]: orchestral piece. At the inaugural concert of the orchestra at the NCPA in Mumbai in April 2019,
[Guest]: we opened with this song, Maitrim Bhajata. So Maitrim Bhajata is a Sanskrit hymn composed by
[Guest]: the Kanchi Shankaracharya with music by this Marathi composer for the films, who worked a lot
[Guest]: with V. Shantaram also. So we tried to bring that before a modern orchestra, and an orchestra
[Guest]: playing the music while we had this beautiful singer from Chennai sing it in Sanskrit. This was
[Guest]: the music, this is a song that was performed by M. S. Subbalakshmi before the United Nations
[Guest]: in 1966. And for listeners who wonder what it means, Maitrim Bhajata is let friendships
[Guest]: resound, let it ring out. And the words are just beautiful, non-denominational. So that's the kind
[Guest]: of thing you need for South Asia. The language was Sanskrit, an Indian language, but the message
[Guest]: is universal. And I think, you know, the musicians of the orchestra, because our orchestra was
[Guest]: performing in India, we did two concerts over. They started the performance with our national
[Guest]: anthem, but there was no question of saying, I'm from Sri Lanka, I don't play this, or, you know,
[Guest]: I'm from Afghanistan. Everybody played together without, they played for the love of the art,
[Guest]: the love of the medium, and not of one country versus another country. So that was really my
[Guest]: message. And so far it's been an entirely Indian effort. My husband and I have tried to fund it
[Guest]: from our own resources, and we've got some help from friends in India, nothing from abroad.
[Guest]: Although now we are entitled to apply for FCRA, we haven't done it as yet. But to sustain this
[Guest]: effort, obviously we will need more resources because our resources are finite. We can't do
[Guest]: this, but I would hate to now having launched it. And the idea has taken hold. All these musicians
[Guest]: who have played with each other, they keep in touch. They're exchanging greetings on festivals
[Guest]: or birthdays, or, you know, they're following each other. And I think we've done something in
[Guest]: that regard. And the other thing I'd like to mention, although Pakistan is not part of it,
[Guest]: I had this wonderful conversation with Ali Sethi about a year ago, during the pandemic, in fact,
[Guest]: in May 2020, I had a conversation. And I would highly recommend that listeners read the verbatim
[Guest]: of it, which was published in The Wire. And we talk about, you know, music as, and his own
[Guest]: background, how he went to Harvard, and he was studying the Tirukkural in his South Asia program,
[Guest]: and the poetry of Ramanujam. You know, so this integrative look, you look at the Ismailis
[Guest]: in Gujarat, the Ismaili community, one of their prayers to Allah, to, you know, an Islamic prayer
[Guest]: is called the Bhuj Niranjan, where the Almighty is called Niranjan, which is really the word you
[Guest]: associate with Vishnu, with our deities. But that word has crept into their religious liturgy,
[Guest]: as it were, Bhuj Niranjan, it's called. It's a prayer to, it's a Muslim prayer,
[Guest]: but it's called that. So this, our history, which brings me back to the central point I mentioned,
[Guest]: understand the history of this region, how interlinked we are, how connected we are,
[Guest]: and severing those connections can't be good for the future of the space that we inhabit.
[Amit Varma]: Fabulous. So tell me about, now let's talk about your personal journey through music.
[Amit Varma]: You know, like you played Spanish guitar as a kid and all of that, but once you joined the
[Amit Varma]: foreign services, that kind of ends and your, you know, your rock star dreams have to be kept
[Guest]: on the back burner for a while, I guess. I was a Joan Baez fan. You're a Joan Baez fan.
[Guest]: I loved Joan Baez, even today I do, but I was just, I went to the academy in Missouri
[Amit Varma]: singing Joan Baez, actually. Wow, wonderful. And when you and your husband parted to two
[Amit Varma]: different postings, did you sing, I never dreamed you'd leave in summer for him?
[Guest]: No, I didn't. And mind you, he sings only in Hindi. My husband also sings, but he sings
[Guest]: early, the Hindi film songs, Talat and, you know, Hemant and Mukesh. So I sing in English,
[Amit Varma]: but he sings in Hindi only. Well, that's quite a jugalbandi. So what I'm fascinated by is that
[Amit Varma]: at 50, 51, you decided I'm going to start learning music again, which is really inspirational,
[Amit Varma]: because I think what happens after we reach a certain age is that we think that if there was
[Amit Varma]: something in our youth that we didn't do, and we wanted to do, it becomes a regret. It doesn't
[Amit Varma]: become a plan of action. It becomes a regret that, oh, I didn't do this or whatever. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, life happens to you when you're busy planning other things, fine, all of that. But
[Amit Varma]: you decided to learn again. In fact, you started learning opera singing, which at one level is
[Amit Varma]: harder, because, you know, and you also speak about the meditative aspects of it and how,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how it helps you so much with your breathing. So tell me a little bit about what
[Amit Varma]: sort of led you to say that, you know, what led you, it takes a lot of confidence also to do this.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I don't know if I'd have it in myself. But what gave you that confidence or the chutzpah
[Amit Varma]: to say, okay, I love doing this, therefore, I will learn it. I don't care how old am I,
[Guest]: take me through that process. Yeah, I was very interested in getting back into music.
[Guest]: But in my early years, of course, I just sang popular music. And, you know, like I mentioned,
[Guest]: Joan Baez, folk music and music you just listen to, you didn't need any specific training for it.
[Guest]: But you, you know, just followed the tune. My sister, you know, how we used to learn music
[Guest]: today you have, you know, you go on to Google and you Google for lyrics and you have the lyrics of a
[Guest]: song, you know, just come up on your smartphone and you sing. Those days, you know, we had to
[Guest]: listen to a song five, six times whenever it came on the radio and write down the words. And, you
[Guest]: know, you'd have gaps. First time you listen to it, you couldn't get everything. Second time you
[Guest]: listen, you would get everything or most of it. Third time, yes. That's how, you know, I have a
[Guest]: songbook with my 14-year-old handwriting full of these songs even somewhere. I don't know where it
[Guest]: is. But today it's very, but when I came to, when I was 50, 51, when I started, I decided to start
[Guest]: music again. I was, since I'd been posted abroad and been to, you know, musical performances and
[Guest]: concerts and I'd been exposed to Western classical music and to opera, a bit of it, and ballet.
[Guest]: And I loved the singing of singers like Maria Callas and Rene Fleming and many others,
[Guest]: Marian Anderson. And I thought, you know, the way they sang and the expressiveness and what they
[Guest]: were singing, opera, many of the, you know, the operatic, the big, great operatic arias, if you
[Guest]: get the translation, many of them are in Italian or German, they're sung, very few in English,
[Guest]: I think. But, you know, the message is very sublime as a human being, I think you can relate
[Guest]: to it. You know, it's about love, it's about death, it's about separation, it's about conflict,
[Guest]: it's about patriotism. All these things, you know, are expressed through opera, very secular.
[Guest]: It's all in a daily life. It's not so much religious. Of course, you had religious songs
[Guest]: also, some great religious, Christian religious hymns that are sung in the concerts. And
[Guest]: especially when you go back to 16th and 17th century singing, which is basically sacred,
[Guest]: not so much. But it's from the 18th century that you have more of things, you know, romantic and
[Guest]: daily life sort of things. And more in the Shakespearean tradition, Shakespeare was a
[Guest]: pioneer much before all this and what he portrayed in his dramas and plays. So I felt, why not give
[Guest]: it a try? It's, you know, many times if you don't know opera, and if you haven't listened to much,
[Guest]: you think, oh, everybody is, you know, singing in a high pitched way. And what exactly are they
[Guest]: saying? If you read Tintin comics, you have singer Bianca Castafiore, who sings and shatters glasses,
[Guest]: you know, that's your impression of opera. But when you actually start studying it,
[Guest]: you realize it's something very sublime, I feel. And the physiology of the voice,
[Guest]: you begin to understand. Breath control is involved. And there's a rigorous discipline
[Guest]: about the way you sing, where you take a breath, where you, you know, how you maintain pitch,
[Guest]: how you, you know, enunciate, how you articulate. All these things appeal to me because I've always
[Guest]: been interested in public speaking and communication. So this, I felt, added to my thirst
[Guest]: for knowledge in this area. So that's how I began to learn opera, but I wasn't able to keep it up
[Guest]: because my professional commitments didn't permit that sort of, it requires rigorous, like with
[Guest]: classical music, even Hindustani or Carnatic, you have to practice, you have to, you know,
[Guest]: stick to a regime. You have to be very, very dedicated, which I could not because I had to,
[Guest]: and my job was there, and my commitments, professional commitments, didn't permit that.
[Guest]: But I think that short one or two years that I learned, it taught me a lot, taught me a lot.
[Guest]: Not only taught me about the repertoire, which I learned so much more about, but also just,
[Guest]: as I said, the physiology of how you use your voice, how you project it, how you,
[Guest]: I said, as you enunciate, how you articulate, how you convey emotion, how you convey feeling.
[Guest]: I think it was very interesting. And so it helped me with my singing later, which is as a hobby,
[Guest]: because I'm very fond of, I sing basically in English. I sing in Bengali also. I'm very fond
[Guest]: of Tagore. So I've, you know, I sing a few things in Bengali, and a little bit in Malayalam,
[Guest]: but basically in English. And I'm very fond of musical theater, which is like Broadway,
[Guest]: and also, and I'm fond of jazz. And I don't sing rock music or pop music, really. So in that sense,
[Guest]: I don't have much of an audience because I think in India is basically the love of Western music is
[Guest]: more, except, you know, there are aficionados of jazz and all, but by and large, among the
[Guest]: vast cross section of people who listen to music, I think, Western music today, basically,
[Guest]: it's popular music, rock music, or rap music, all that, you know, you see it also being
[Guest]: incorporated into our own film music. So, you know, you mentioned you sing
[Amit Varma]: Bengali songs, can you sing Akla Chalo Re? I don't sing Akla Chalo Re, I sing,
[Amit Varma]: but I know Akla Chalo Re, I haven't sung it. Otherwise, at the end of the episode,
[Amit Varma]: I would have asked you. Well, that's the story of my life, I think, Akla Chalo Re. Yeah, that's
[Amit Varma]: what I thought, because I love that song. And I thought, oh, if you're singing Bengali, surely,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that would be the first song you'd pick. Couple of questions. And this, I'm really just
[Amit Varma]: thinking aloud, like one of the interesting things about opera is, you'll never see a mic
[Amit Varma]: used by an opera singer, right? Because so much breath control, you're projecting your voice,
[Amit Varma]: as you said, it all comes from there. Now, I'm thinking of how the form of something
[Amit Varma]: can sometimes shape the content, which in many different contexts, I explore this scene.
[Amit Varma]: But for example, you know, in the 1920s, vocal music changed dramatically, because mics became
[Amit Varma]: advanced enough to pick up these small nuances. So a singer like Bing Crosby could whisper into
[Amit Varma]: the mic and could sing a song that way. And there would be a whole different feel and that affects
[Amit Varma]: the music. And I'm just thinking that if opera requires this kind of projection out, does that
[Amit Varma]: then also influence a kind of content and the kind of singing that you're doing? Like, then would
[Amit Varma]: every emotion be heightened? Because so much is kind of going into it? You know, so and I don't
[Amit Varma]: know opera at all. So forgive me if this is like a very basic question, but just thinking aloud
[Amit Varma]: that it seems that this form that you're always throwing your voice, you're projecting and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth, is something that would have an impact on the music and the kind of music also,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore on the listener and therefore on the singer?
[Guest]: Well, I think it comes from a very different culture, operatic singing, I suppose. And
[Guest]: of course, the Mongolians have throat singing, as you know, this, this, of course, comes from
[Guest]: a very Western tradition and, and has its origins, obviously, in earlier centuries, where you had
[Guest]: the form of religious singing that that Western cultures had, there's no doubt about that. It's
[Guest]: a very different experience from what we had. But I think since we are going into and I,
[Guest]: but then that doesn't stop you from learning opera, that should not stop you from saying,
[Guest]: oh, you know, they're Western. I don't think we have the capacity to do that. We are very different.
[Guest]: I think we need more confidence and faith in ourselves to be able to try,
[Guest]: try out new things without sacrificing where we come from, or where we belong, or from,
[Guest]: you know, the cultures into which we were born. I'm not saying we should ever forget that.
[Guest]: But we can be just as good in those. I know so many young Indians who have studied opera,
[Guest]: quite a few of them and who are excelling in them. So, you know, it's not that our voices can't do
[Guest]: what Westerners have been doing. We have that capacity. So I think in terms of also interpreting
[Guest]: ourselves to the rest of the world, I think if we do things like this, others are a little more
[Guest]: curious about you, they want to know more about you, and they become they befriend you. It's a
[Guest]: way of building bridges also, I feel, to be able to look at foreign cultures and say, what's good
[Guest]: in that culture can become mine also. I can also, you know, opera is a classical form. It's a
[Guest]: classical form. Nobody can dismiss it as saying, you know, it is something that, it's not for
[Guest]: novices. It's a very, very serious form. So if we are drawn to it, then say I have the confidence
[Guest]: and I will try and learn it and see what I can imbibe. And also the argument that it's from
[Amit Varma]: outside is a nonsense argument. Even potatoes are from outside. Are we going to stop eating
[Amit Varma]: potatoes? Chilies are from outside. Stitch clothing came from outside. Are we going to
[Amit Varma]: wrap a cloth around us and walk around? If you want to do that, that's fine. But yeah,
[Amit Varma]: everything is kind of from outside. So one more question on the theme of music before we move on
[Amit Varma]: from here, and it's not really on music, but it's something that sort of I thought of because music
[Amit Varma]: clearly gives you so much joy. So what gives you joy, in the sense that when you wake up in the
[Amit Varma]: morning, what makes you look forward to the rest of the day, like obviously listening to music,
[Amit Varma]: or maybe singing, maybe singing with your husband, he sings in Hindi, you sing in English,
[Amit Varma]: that might give you joy, maybe spending time with your kids would give you joy, though it depends
[Amit Varma]: on the kids, maybe it wouldn't, in which case, bad kids introspect more. But so what are the
[Amit Varma]: things that kind of give you joy? And do you sometimes think that, hey, you know, when I was
[Amit Varma]: 40, when I was 50, I should have focused a little less on all the other things that I did and just
[Guest]: focused on what makes me happy? What makes me happy when I wake up in the morning, I am, you
[Guest]: know, I'm at this stage of my life, I'm just thankful for waking up, waking up, yes. And,
[Guest]: you know, for the for when I look out of the window, and I see it's a normal day, it's a
[Guest]: bright day. I love sunshine. I'm not a rain person. Of course, I realize how important rains are,
[Guest]: always love the sunshine really. And just I'm really very into the environment. I love being
[Guest]: surrounded by greenery. And that's why I love going to the Nilgiris where I grew up and to
[Guest]: Coonoor because that pristine environment, which you can still see in those hills, appeals to me
[Guest]: very much. So that and yes, the sound of good music certainly makes me happy, which is it's
[Guest]: not something I listen to first thing in the morning. But and the fact that there is there's
[Guest]: so much to do, you know, that you plan to do this today, that you have this to do. So I get,
[Guest]: I concentrate the mind, I think the ability to concentrate the mind gives me happiness.
[Amit Varma]: Profound wisdom. You know, before we talk about your wonderful book, which we'll briefly do,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a couple of general sort of questions, and one of them comes from diplomacy, but also
[Amit Varma]: extends outside of it. Now, just as earlier, we spoke about airports being one country or
[Amit Varma]: cantonments being one country. And similarly, it seems to me that diplomats can inhabit the
[Amit Varma]: same country, in the sense that all diplomats everywhere are basically doing the same thing,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, they are sort of representatives of their nations in this strange dance, a strange
[Amit Varma]: game that is being played. And therefore, you kind of just play that game. And so my kind of
[Amit Varma]: question is that, you know, you've referred in different places to, you know, to friends that
[Amit Varma]: you have in, you know, all of these friends that you made through your career, you know, at one
[Amit Varma]: point where you were talking about Sri Lanka, in fact, there was this poignant moment where you
[Amit Varma]: talk about the foreign minister, the Lakshman Gadirgamal, who was assassinated just a couple
[Amit Varma]: of hours after, you know, meeting you at that event and all that. But my question is a broader
[Amit Varma]: one. One is that, of course, you know, you travel the world, you meet new people, all the time you
[Amit Varma]: make friends. And this is a theme that I've been coming back to with a couple of my guests in terms
[Amit Varma]: of how do we form friendships, especially how do we form friendships in adulthood? Like it seems a
[Amit Varma]: lot of people, they have school friends and college friends, and then they lose the habit, like
[Amit Varma]: Abhinandan Sekri was on my show, the brilliant journalist. And he said that he has no friends
[Amit Varma]: after the age of 25. They're all from before, right? So which means there's a comfort zone,
[Amit Varma]: and then you're in that comfort zone. In my case, on the other hand, I think the internet was a
[Amit Varma]: great boon. And all my close friends today are really people I have met in very serendipitous
[Amit Varma]: ways, mostly enabled by the internet, right? And those are kind of my friendships. And I think there
[Amit Varma]: is, I find that there is great value in that, because the friends that we make when we are young
[Amit Varma]: are restricted by circumstance, we go to a particular school, and that's a pool of people we
[Amit Varma]: have, we go to a particular college, that's a pool of people we have, all of which say the same
[Amit Varma]: stupid things on WhatsApp. So you don't really want to be friends with them. But through life,
[Amit Varma]: you can form communities of choice, where, you know, and that I feel can be so enriching. So
[Amit Varma]: when you look back on your life, having traveled in so many places, you know, dived into so many
[Amit Varma]: cultures, made so many different friends in different places. How do you think of that?
[Amit Varma]: Like, if young people are listening to this, how seriously should they just take that sense of
[Amit Varma]: getting to know people getting to listen, and I know you mentioned earlier that you're a loner,
[Amit Varma]: and so am I, you know, just being with people just saps my energy. You know, I hate people.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about any perspectives you have on this.
[Guest]: Yeah, talking about friends, I think most of the friends I've made have been,
[Guest]: the friends I keep in touch with today have been, there's just one I know, I have kept in touch with
[Guest]: from my high school days, and I continue to keep in touch and we are very close. But otherwise,
[Guest]: they're all from my subsequent career, my friends, especially music. This whole thing of opening my
[Guest]: life to music brought me beautiful friendships. And the other point I wanted to mention was,
[Guest]: and these are friends from various countries, they may be Peruvian, they may be Australian,
[Guest]: they may be British, Sri Lankan. So really all across the world, and I keep in touch with them,
[Guest]: and they're important to me. And you know, we've shared so many beautiful
[Guest]: moments together. The other thing is that I now find I make friends with people who are
[Guest]: much younger than me, maybe a generation younger than me, and we're wonderful friends. So I think
[Guest]: friendship can span generations, it just need not be confined to somebody you knew in school,
[Guest]: or somebody who was brought up with you, or somebody of your own vintage, it need not be.
[Guest]: And I think that is another thing that keeps the energy, you know, of up and your joie de vivre,
[Guest]: you know, your love of life going. I think keeping in touch with young people,
[Guest]: I've really enjoyed my friendships with younger people.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about the Fractured Himalaya there. And I don't want to talk about it too much,
[Amit Varma]: because I want people to just buy it, read it. It's a fascinating book. There are so many human
[Amit Varma]: stories in it. And there's a lot of thriller material, intrigue and drama. One of the things
[Amit Varma]: that I'm interested in, which you look interested in knowing your views on, is you spoke about,
[Amit Varma]: sort of Nehru, about how it might be unfair, just because we have the benefit of hindsight,
[Amit Varma]: to, you know, blame everything that happened there on Nehru. And at some level, I agree with that.
[Amit Varma]: But at another level, I also think and this is not necessarily blaming it on him, because
[Amit Varma]: who knows if there is even free will. But I, I can agree with matters like not blaming somebody
[Amit Varma]: for something he or she did, just because we know it, it didn't work out well in hindsight.
[Amit Varma]: This is not about things that he did. It is also a sort of state of mind of the of how people kind
[Amit Varma]: of approach certain things. At one point, you refer to Isaiah Berlin's Fox and the Hedgehog
[Amit Varma]: thing. You know, a hedgehog only knows one big thing, a fox knows many things. Nehru kind of
[Amit Varma]: fancied himself as a fox, he knows little bits about everything. But even there, I think he makes
[Amit Varma]: a hedgehog mistake of having one lens and applying it on that one thing. And which almost seems a
[Amit Varma]: character attribute, you've quoted Lloyd George is saying that, quote, Nehru thought he knew more
[Amit Varma]: history than the experts knew. He decides by inspiration, stop quote. And I of course, had a
[Amit Varma]: recent episode on the debates that Nehru had with four worthies and one of them was on China,
[Amit Varma]: where Sardar Patel kept warning him that, you know, we have to do something about Tibet,
[Amit Varma]: we have to be practical, we have to be pragmatic. But Nehru was taken in by this romanticism,
[Amit Varma]: and by this conception of himself as this leader who leads from, you know, a particular kind of
[Amit Varma]: place and a notion of China, which was, you know, different from was mistaken in different ways,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps. And in many ways, in fact, it seems to me that just as Nehru was constructing his idea
[Amit Varma]: of India, he was also constructing his idea of himself. And this was, and this character trait
[Amit Varma]: manifests itself across different issues. So it is not as if he did, as if he made a mistake on
[Amit Varma]: China, it is not as if he made a mistake in say, our economic direction, or that he made a mistake
[Amit Varma]: in dealing with people like Jinnah. It's that he had this sort of, even though you give him,
[Amit Varma]: one has to give him a lot of credit for engaging with ideas and his dialogues with all of these
[Amit Varma]: people are just incredible, men of incredible erudition and curiosity. But there was also a
[Amit Varma]: sort of a stubbornness and arrogance and different aspects of that also kind of come up in parts of
[Amit Varma]: your book and so many other books, and especially in that chapter in Tripur Daman and Adil's book,
[Amit Varma]: where he has a debate with Patel on this. And that is something that I think, you know,
[Amit Varma]: cannot be wished away. Now, I'm not saying that you just blame the China war on Nehru,
[Amit Varma]: it's a combination of various circumstances, it's multifactorial, even events contain multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: But where I'm coming at with this is that we can look back on history and like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there's that old cliche about character being destiny. And in some sense, when you have people
[Amit Varma]: in power, whether it's Nehru or Mao, or whoever, you know, it takes on this tragic tinge. Like
[Amit Varma]: sometimes when I think about figures in Indian history, like Jinnah, right, how he loses control
[Amit Varma]: of the Congress in 1921, where Gandhi does his, you know, Gandhi kind of takes over the Congress,
[Amit Varma]: and Jinnah changes direction completely, right? Or even in Nehru and so many other people,
[Amit Varma]: they seem like deeply tragic, King Lear kind of figures, especially, you know, when Nehru
[Amit Varma]: eventually realizes his mistakes on China, and, you know, just disintegrates at the end. And it is,
[Amit Varma]: it is so tragic, it is so tragic that, you know, he has to go through that and the cost of that,
[Amit Varma]: which the entire nation has taken, which of course he feels. So when you look through history,
[Amit Varma]: and I'm asking you not as someone who's been a diplomat, but just as a historian, and there's
[Amit Varma]: so much I could ask you about that as well about learning to be a practitioner historian, as
[Amit Varma]: opposed to an academic historian, looking through history, and especially as you have known so many
[Amit Varma]: of these people yourself, right? You met Xi Jinping many times, you've, you know, known
[Amit Varma]: Rajiv Gandhi well, you've known so many prominent people in different countries so well. What do you
[Amit Varma]: feel about this? Do you feel that in a way that people who come to positions of power or close to
[Amit Varma]: positions of power, they are constrained by character constrained by who they are, and
[Amit Varma]: everything kind of flows from there. And that can have a tragic dimension, like what happened to Mao
[Amit Varma]: in China, what happened to, you know, all the mistakes Nehru made, and Nehru also did many
[Amit Varma]: great things which emanated from positive aspects of his character. But, you know, he messed up on
[Amit Varma]: China, he, you know, messed up on the communal question, certainly before independence, he messed
[Amit Varma]: up on the economy pretty badly. So what are what are your sort of thoughts on this, just looking
[Amit Varma]: at these figures, you know, you're someone who's read a lot, you love opera, you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: Shakespeare, these are grand figures, except that what they're affecting is not a story, but the
[Guest]: real world. Well, I think human frailty is a constant, Nehru was no exception. And but Nehru,
[Guest]: as I said, I agree that he was flawed, but flawed in a heroic sense in some ways, because nobody
[Guest]: could doubt I think his dedication to the country or his patriotism or his his desire to to put
[Guest]: India at the forefront of nations. I don't think anybody would question that. But I think he the
[Guest]: situation in which he found himself firstly, of course, India is a young country,
[Guest]: combating many challenges. I agree that many of them flowed from the pre-independence era and
[Guest]: steps taken then. But he was there at the helm, and he had to deal with them and deal with them
[Guest]: as the best he could. Now, his differences with Sardar Patel, of course, we all know that. But I
[Guest]: think what impressed me was the manner in which they both learned to work together. I think they,
[Guest]: you know, the rivalry was there, not the rivalry, perhaps the certain incompatibilities between the
[Guest]: two were definitely there. But they took their direction from Gandhiji and they learned to work
[Amit Varma]: together. What's interesting is the China debate is what could have brought this to a head,
[Amit Varma]: because there was rebellion brewing in the cabinet, first Rajaji fought with Nehru,
[Amit Varma]: then, you know, Patel wrote his famous note on China, you know, just two months before he died.
[Amit Varma]: And then there was going to be a cabinet meeting to discuss it. The cabinet had all lined up with
[Amit Varma]: Patel. And then he falls in, he misses a cabinet meeting, and then he dies a month later.
[Guest]: Yeah, I know, I'm aware of that. And Patel was about 15 years older than Nehru. And in fact,
[Guest]: Nehru died 15 years, almost 15 years later, almost at the same age. So in that sense,
[Guest]: there was a gap in chronology between the two, of course. We don't know what would have ensued
[Guest]: if Sadat Patel had lived and he had continued to wield influence on the making of policy and how
[Guest]: differences would have mounted vis-a-vis Nehru. We don't, we can only conjecture to that effect.
[Guest]: But everybody makes a lot out of this letter from Patel to Nehru of 7th November 1950,
[Guest]: a few weeks before he died. And, you know, it's made out to seem that there was a plethora of
[Guest]: differences between the two on how to operate this policy towards Tibet. But then if you look at the
[Guest]: bare, you know, essence of the situation at that time, you know, India could have mounted
[Guest]: a diplomatic offensive, you can say, against the Chinese entering Tibet, could not have mounted a
[Guest]: military offensive. I mean, even General Kariyappa said at that time that you couldn't send more than
[Guest]: a posse of troops, perhaps a battalion of troops to defend maybe our agency in Gyanse or…
[Amit Varma]: But if I remember correctly, at one point, the British said that they were willing to station
[Amit Varma]: troops in Tibet for the time being so that China wouldn't take it over and Nehru said no.
[Guest]: I don't think, I have no, at least I didn't come across this. I think I vaguely remember
[Guest]: this from Adil and Tripurdaman's book. Yeah, but I, you know, how could that, I mean,
[Guest]: you would have been, I don't think the British, they would have liked India perhaps to take a more
[Guest]: overt diplomatic stance on the entry of Chinese troops into Tibet, particularly at the UN,
[Guest]: when the Tibetans were trying very hard to bring their case. At that time, I think that's where
[Guest]: perhaps we kind of could have done more and we decided to kind of skirt the issue and avoid
[Guest]: looking at it. But mind you, the very same diplomats like Sir Girija Shankar Bajpai, who
[Guest]: we believe did brief Patel and apparently could have even drafted the letter that Patel sent to
[Guest]: Nehru. The same Sir Girija, although some of his advice on China was very practical, like take up
[Guest]: the issue of the boundary in the 1954 talks on Tibet, which was what his advice to Nehru was.
[Guest]: Nehru ignored it in favor of Sardar Panicker's advice. But when the Chinese entered Tibet,
[Guest]: even somebody like Sir Girija was somewhat, I think, divided in his opinion about what could
[Guest]: be done, you know, even though personally he felt we should do much more to support the Tibetans.
[Guest]: But even he felt that the Tibetan order, the theocratic order within Tibet was antiquated,
[Guest]: that it had to change, it had to modernize. And secondly, that there was no strength to withstand
[Guest]: the Chinese offensive. India could have done little. So there was that feeling of, you know,
[Guest]: understanding the practical difficulties and the nature of the situation, while at the
[Guest]: at the level of principle, yes, you should do much more. You have to take on the communists,
[Guest]: you should, you know. But he was also, Sir Girija was as an excellent advisor to Nehru.
[Guest]: And Nehru was fond of him. It was not, I mean, that was an era where you could have differences
[Guest]: of opinion and yet deal, you know, with your superiors. And that is something perhaps that
[Guest]: is less and less seen today. But again, to come back to the question, after Patel wrote his letter
[Guest]: to Nehru, unfortunately passed away a few weeks later. But it was not as if Nehru slept over that
[Guest]: advice. He didn't respond directly to Patel. But, you know, the cabinet was convened, the committees
[Guest]: were set up regarding the extension of Indian administration right up to the frontier to
[Guest]: safeguard our security, to bolster, you know, improve infrastructure. The initial steps were
[Guest]: taken soon after that letter. And that is how you find the entry into the extension of administration
[Guest]: into Tawang in February 1951. It was all steps taken, keeping in mind the situation that was
[Guest]: going to change on our frontiers with the entry of the Chinese into Tibet. So the picture is mixed,
[Guest]: I feel. You know, we can fault Nehru and Nehru is faulted for saying, you know, Patel said this
[Guest]: and Nehru was, you know, smoking a pipe, literally dreaming about friendship with China. No, but it's
[Guest]: not exactly like that. Nehru understood the challenge from China. He said that it would
[Guest]: be a slippery path if we, you know, do not acknowledge this challenge. He understood that.
[Guest]: He understood that borders had to be safeguarded, security had to be strengthened. We had to,
[Guest]: you know, maintain a presence which was right up. I think where I think the slippage occurred was in
[Guest]: the Aksai Chin area, where the terrain, the geography, the nature of the expanse of territory
[Guest]: made it very difficult for the extension of our presence into that area, which the Chinese
[Amit Varma]: exploited and which caused the dispute. So I'll quickly read out that bit because
[Amit Varma]: I was wondering if I'm mistaken. So I straight away went to the book and I've,
[Amit Varma]: so this is from Tipurtaman and Adil Hussain's book on Nehru and the introductory essay to this chapter
[Amit Varma]: where they write, quote, When Tibet turned to India for help, requesting formal recognition
[Amit Varma]: of its independence as a basis for bringing before the United Nations any attack as international
[Amit Varma]: aggression, its request was turned down. Anglo-American requests for cooperation in
[Amit Varma]: transferring military aid to Lhasa were similarly denied. In January 1950, for example, when
[Amit Varma]: Secretary of State Dean Acheson considered inviting a Tibetan mission to Washington and
[Amit Varma]: inquired whether the Indian government would be willing to cooperate with the United States in
[Amit Varma]: helping strengthen Tibet's military capacity, he received a negative reply from Foreign Secretary
[Amit Varma]: KPS Menon. Stop quote. But my point here wasn't to sort of indict Nehru. I mean, the one thing
[Amit Varma]: I would indict Nehru for very, very strongly, where I think there is no justification was
[Amit Varma]: what he did for free speech, like the sedition law was struck down as unconstitutional by the
[Amit Varma]: courts in 1950, and he brought it back with the First Amendment. And I think that there's no
[Amit Varma]: defense of that, but that's a separate area. In China, it's deeply complicated. There is so much
[Amit Varma]: stuff happening that is really difficult now in hindsight to blame everyone. As far as his
[Amit Varma]: intentions are concerned, listen, even Prime Minister Modi after demonetization said,
[Guest]: what are we going to do with Niyat, you know, we can't have Niyat for lunch.
[Guest]: But even if you, you know, when you quoted from Adil Hussain's book, you know, the British and
[Guest]: American interest in trying to do something for the Tibetans was definitely there, not in terms
[Guest]: of stationing troops, but providing some military aid, which India at that time advised against
[Guest]: because we felt that we would be the country facing China on that border. We would be the
[Guest]: people who would have to transact that relationship. The Americans and the British and all
[Guest]: were absorbed a lot with Korea at the moment. Their focus was on the Korean peninsula, not on
[Guest]: Tibet. So Tibet, in that sense, I've called it the Cinderella of our foreign office, literally.
[Guest]: Became the Cinderella, but there was nobody to rescue Cinderella from her fate, literally. And
[Guest]: that still hasn't happened. It still continues to be like that. So what could we have done under
[Guest]: the circumstances? And my answer is, at least diplomatically, we should have been prepared to
[Guest]: do something for Tibet, especially at the United Nations, for instance. We could have done something.
[Guest]: We could have kept the question of the Chinese claim or the Chinese imposition of their so-called
[Guest]: sovereignty over Tibet in question. We could have kept that open. But that would have also entailed,
[Guest]: and perhaps that thought did cross Nehru's mind, that would have entailed a relationship of open
[Guest]: hostility with China. And at that point of time, how prepared were we for that? It was a world in
[Guest]: flux. It was a world which was in churn at that time. And the republic was very young.
[Guest]: The republic needed to be, the ship of state needed to be sustained. And a lot of internal
[Guest]: challenges within the country had to be addressed. So this is still a situation
[Guest]: in the making, in formation. Nobody knew where it was going to lead. That's why I say hindsight is
[Guest]: always 20-20. We can say a lot of things. We could have done this and that. But when it came to Tibet,
[Guest]: I think the nature of the geography, the nature of the terrain made it so much more easier for
[Guest]: China to enter, to occupy, to extend its control. So what was the best thing we could have done
[Guest]: under these circumstances was to safeguard our own frontiers, to understand the threat
[Amit Varma]: to our security. The point of my question wasn't to assign blame, but just to sort of point out
[Amit Varma]: how something that you pointed out in your book, how the personalities mattered, that Nehru had
[Amit Varma]: one particular kind of personality, you know, dreamy, idealistic, smoking a pipe, as you put
[Guest]: it, as you put it now, you didn't put it in the book. Just figuratively. We didn't smoke a pipe.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, please, please, WhatsApp people calm down. Don't spread this. And on the other hand, there
[Amit Varma]: was, you know, Zhao Enlai and Mao, who were, you know, very different kinds of people. But, you
[Amit Varma]: know, they might have been friendly and Mao certainly had a sense of humor, but they were
[Amit Varma]: very pragmatic and very hard nosed about where their national interests are and that kind of
[Amit Varma]: matter. And you've pointed out and this I found was one really profound insight from your book,
[Amit Varma]: where you've pointed out the key contradiction in our foreign policy, where you write, quote,
[Amit Varma]: India's frontier policy of firm boundaries was transacted in a world place segregated
[Amit Varma]: from a foreign policy on China that stressed conciliation, dialogue and accommodation,
[Amit Varma]: a non sustainable exercise in policy contradiction, stop quote. And an illustration of this is perhaps
[Amit Varma]: the big deal that didn't happen. Like in your book, you've written about how we could have
[Amit Varma]: used Aksai Chin as a bargaining chip to get China to say that, okay, we'll respect whatever is south
[Amit Varma]: of the McMahon line. And so they were settled on that basis. And I think even in the 80s,
[Amit Varma]: there were ways to settle this, but there were opportunities kind of lost.
[Guest]: But to my mind, once China and Pakistan transacted the so called boundary agreement in 1963,
[Guest]: some of the doors had closed on that because today, the Chinese are very unwilling to discuss
[Guest]: why is it that they have not agreed to a joint delineation of the line of actual control? It's
[Guest]: because they don't want to discuss the boundary west of the Karakoram Pass. Of course, you can
[Guest]: argue, if you're the devil's advocate, that what is the line of actual control west of the Karakoram
[Guest]: Pass? Because unfortunately, because of the circumstances of what has happened in history,
[Guest]: China and Pakistan getting together and reaching an agreement on that section of the boundary,
[Guest]: a so called agreement on that section of the boundary, there's no line of actual control where
[Guest]: we are operating there. You know, we claim it, it's part of our sovereign territory, we say,
[Guest]: and we may be perfectly justified in that. But there is no line of actual control, would you
[Guest]: agree, west of the Karakoram Pass, in terms of an India-China line of actual control? It's not
[Guest]: there. But we have refused to define it thus. And the Chinese say we will not discuss it west of
[Guest]: Karakoram Pass, because the line of actual control is really false, south-southeast of Karakoram
[Guest]: Pass. They haven't said it in so many words. The Chinese are never explicit. But the differences
[Guest]: came to light on that ground. When we started the exercise of delineating the line of, or defining
[Guest]: it, in the early 2000s, we were doing that. It fell apart because of this. Yeah, and you know,
[Amit Varma]: honestly, I could talk about your book for another four hours, because it's so rich in content and
[Amit Varma]: questions. But I'll just urge the readers to go and check it out. Some final questions. And
[Amit Varma]: one obviously is about where India and China stand today and what's really going on.
[Amit Varma]: Because on the one hand, you see a weakened India that whenever something happens,
[Amit Varma]: whenever there is aggression from there, we'll do some kind of narrative building or posturing like
[Amit Varma]: ban TikTok, you know, and that kind of nonsense. And on the other hand, you see, you know, it's
[Amit Varma]: hard for me to figure out exactly where China is aiming to go by ramping up the aggression in this
[Amit Varma]: way. Like, what is the end goal? Where are the boundaries? You know, what's going on there?
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you've met Xi Jinping many times. So maybe you'll have some insight into his
[Guest]: character. I really don't, I'm afraid. He's an enigma wrapped in a riddle.
[Amit Varma]: But how do we look at the India-China problem? Because I don't even see what levers we have.
[Amit Varma]: They want to build a village in Arunachal Pradesh, they'll build a village in Arunachal Pradesh.
[Amit Varma]: What are we going to do? Right? So how does one look at this?
[Guest]: I think it's a question of, you know, comprehensive national strength and the current asymmetries of
[Guest]: power between India and China. And until we are able to narrow those asymmetries and until we
[Guest]: build the country in a, in mission mode, let's put it, build India and achieve all the aspirations
[Guest]: that we've set for ourselves, I think these uncertainties along our frontier will continue.
[Guest]: Unless, of course, India and China sit down together and say, okay, we have not,
[Guest]: we are not settling the boundary. But from the east of the Karakoram Pass,
[Guest]: till the Izu-Razi Pass, which is at the trijunction of India, Burma, and China, or Tibet,
[Guest]: as you may refer to it, until we are able at least to come to some understanding on that,
[Guest]: saying that we understand there are pockets of difference, you know, where aggression or
[Guest]: transgressions have taken place. But we will create zones of disengagement there. And, you know,
[Guest]: if you're thinking in an imaginative way, I mean, think of, you know, sanctuaries and,
[Guest]: you know, preservation of the environment and all these things where we can work together.
[Guest]: But that requires will, particularly from the Chinese side. I don't think it's for lack of
[Guest]: willingness on the Indian side. I think there's much more openness to at least consider such
[Guest]: ideas, at least from my experience. But the Chinese have been impossibly rigid from the
[Guest]: mid-1980s onwards. And as their power has grown, they have become even more inflexible, even more,
[Guest]: you can use the word that Nehru used, expansionist. Their ambition now really knows no boundaries,
[Guest]: I think, which is the danger and the risks that all countries that have territorial
[Guest]: differences and potential for conflict with China are experiencing today. But the line,
[Guest]: the line, at least we should consider that if you can't give up claims and if you can't concede
[Guest]: to one or the other side or reach some level of accommodation on the lines of what we could have
[Guest]: in the early 1960s, at least we have some management regime for this relationship where
[Guest]: you de-escalate, where you're able to disengage, where you have to, where you are allowing people
[Guest]: on both sides to trade with each other and improve contact and communication, trade and commercial
[Guest]: level and better understanding. It may take 50 to 100 years to better understand each other and
[Guest]: create mutual trust and confidence. It won't happen overnight. But in the absence of it not
[Guest]: happening overnight, is the alternative only, you know, jingoism on either side, populist rhetoric,
[Guest]: nationalism, mutual, you know, not looking at the problem, hoping it'll go away. That's not
[Guest]: going to happen, I think. And ultimately, even if we talk of the Indo-Pacific and we talk of the
[Guest]: Quad and we talk of our growing partnership with the Americans, nobody is going to help us, you
[Guest]: know, when it comes to these conflicts that we have, you know, nobody's going to fight our
[Guest]: battles for us, except in some kind of fictional scenario. So, you know, you can think of scenarios
[Guest]: like the novel that by Admiral Stavridis, a recent novel called 2034. It speaks of an imaginary
[Guest]: scenario in the year 2034, where the US and China go to war with each other and what happens in the
[Guest]: Indo-Pacific and even the role that India plays, which is more of a peacemaker, which is the ideal
[Guest]: role we should be playing in such situations, because we cannot be camp followers of any
[Guest]: country, I really feel. I mean, although they say non-alignment is outmoded, and we need not use
[Guest]: that word, but we have to act in our own interest. And India is a standalone country in many ways,
[Guest]: by virtue of our position, the neighborhood we are in, the challenges we face, the Indian Ocean,
[Guest]: where we have such a commanding position. We don't have to be anybody's camp follower, but we can
[Guest]: align our interests with various countries. But that doesn't take away from the need for us to
[Guest]: have peaceful borders, you know, for our own progress, because there are really, there's so
[Guest]: much to be done as yet to achieve the goals we want to as a nation. And that really requires
[Guest]: more focus on these problems that we face with our neighbors. Others are not going to help us.
[Guest]: The Quad is not, other members of Quad are not going to help us on this. I mean, you saw how
[Guest]: AUKUS came about. I mean, the Anglosphere gets together. They will always, Australia has fought
[Guest]: in every battle on the side of the Americans, but that's not our history. I mean, the Americans are
[Guest]: democracy, the America is a democracy like us. We have a huge diaspora there. Our interests are so
[Guest]: much more intertwined. But ultimately, we are situated where we are, and that we cannot row
[Guest]: ourselves away. It's not row, you know, the Statue of Liberty won't be our beacon, cannot be our
[Guest]: savior, you know, at this moment, inviting all the poor and wretched to come to. We have to face
[Guest]: situations within our own neighborhood and face them not in a combative way, as in the populist
[Guest]: sense, it's combativeness. You know, peace is waving the white flag of surrender. That's not
[Guest]: what peace is. You know, I think when peace is destroyed, you realize you have no friends anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, your successor as foreign secretary is now a foreign minister, Mr. Jaishankar,
[Amit Varma]: right? So, a thought experiment, if you were to be foreign minister, right? We're given complete
[Guest]: freedom by whoever the prime minister is. He was my successor in China. He was my successor in the US.
[Amit Varma]: See, it's very sad. They should have made you foreign minister. But in my thought experiment,
[Amit Varma]: you are. And in my thought experiment, the prime minister, whoever it is, tells you that just go
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, whatever your vision is, just implement it. From that perspective, just looking
[Amit Varma]: at foreign policy as a whole, and I guess China would dominate a big part of that, what would be
[Amit Varma]: the areas of hope? Because the more I see it, one, we don't really have too many good foreign policy
[Amit Varma]: levers, because of various reasons. Sure, we have an important position geographically and all of
[Amit Varma]: that. But our levers are limited, you know, and also, when it comes to China, it seems to me and
[Amit Varma]: correct me if I'm wrong, that not only are they not particularly keen to talk because they're in
[Amit Varma]: such a position of power, why talk, but we don't, we seem to have a hard time even understanding
[Amit Varma]: what they want to begin with. So to, you know, begin that process where I mean, the whole goal
[Amit Varma]: of foreign policy should be that, I suppose, that you just try to play positive sum games with
[Amit Varma]: everyone, you know, and everyone is better off in the end. Now, typically, what it comes down to is
[Amit Varma]: you're playing zero sum games, and when things go bad, they become negative sum games, especially,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when you have conflicts that can degenerate into war. So if you were to be
[Amit Varma]: foreign minister, and you were to sort of outline sort of a foreign policy vision for us, like part
[Amit Varma]: of that you just did outline, where you said that, forget the term non aligned, but we don't
[Amit Varma]: necessarily need to look at strategic considerations of, oh, let us ally with the US for this, or let
[Amit Varma]: us ally with so and so for this, but rather follow our own interests on a case by case basis, and so
[Amit Varma]: on, if I'm reading you correctly. So, you know, what would be the broad contours of what you would
[Amit Varma]: want to do and where you would want to go, assuming no constraints like this constant
[Amit Varma]: populist rhetoric of, you know, and banning TikTok and all this rubbish that goes on?
[Guest]: Well, first and foremost, let me say, as a former colleague, that Dr. Jaishankar has all the
[Guest]: competence and experience to be foreign minister, and I don't question that.
[Amit Varma]: I was joking, of course he does.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, no, you, of course, I just wanted to say that. So I realised that he doesn't face an easy
[Guest]: task. So it's, it's maybe, you know, it would be facile on my part to comment on how he could
[Guest]: have done this or that. So be that as it may. If I were given that position of responsibility,
[Guest]: you, of course, work within the system and, you know, you often have to defer to the prime
[Guest]: minister and how he wishes a certain, what his judgment is on. But I think it's your responsibility
[Guest]: also to, to provide him or her with all the facts and the nuances and the subtleties of a certain
[Guest]: policy. My own experience is that prime ministers understand this very well and, and, and they take
[Guest]: on board, especially the foreign ministry is quite influential in that way. The advice from the
[Guest]: professional foreign service is always taken on board and internalised and used as a, as a guide
[Guest]: to how the policy is ultimately, ultimately framed. I think that my advice to the prime minister would
[Guest]: be to, to concentrate doubly and triply on the neighbourhood and to see how we can withstand
[Guest]: and in a sense, neutralise the, the ingress by China into our neighbourhood, the, the way it's
[Guest]: come in, the kind of influence peddling it has done. It's becoming a key influencer within,
[Guest]: within the polities of many of our neighbours. And I think we need a good, good forensic
[Guest]: examination of how this could have happened, how, where we misstepped or where we were,
[Guest]: did less than we should have, or how we could have, you know, withstood this kind of thing.
[Guest]: So I think that would be a focus. I think relations with the Americans and others have,
[Guest]: have, have had a certain course and I don't think there's any correction needed.
[Guest]: I think where China is concerned, I think again, we should try and, and understand that
[Guest]: everything is connected here. It's not just that China has become powerful and become more
[Guest]: aggressive and muscular and expansionist. It's true. They have the wherewithal today in terms
[Guest]: of military and economic strength to do that. But, but the nature of our problems with China
[Guest]: is such that they have a history, it's a legacy dispute. And that does not go away despite what
[Guest]: they're doing in Ladakh today is part of that legacy dispute. It's not just a part of their
[Guest]: expansionism and new, you know, military strength, which is of course much more,
[Guest]: but everything stems from those differences that have persisted over the last 60 years,
[Guest]: at least if you take 1960 as, you know, a cutoff from what has happened in terms of what has
[Guest]: happened. So understand that continuity also, and, and to realize that, that we have to make the best
[Guest]: of the situation. We have to see how to address the pressure points and to reduce the pressure
[Guest]: that we are facing so that, you know, some semblance, we don't, we don't continue with
[Guest]: this two front challenge that we have with India and Pakistan. I mean, with China and Pakistan,
[Guest]: really, we, we have to be able to, to diffuse these tensions. And, and so in a sense we're
[Guest]: doing, I think it's practical that our relationship with Russia should continue, should be strong,
[Guest]: should have endured. And that the Russia, India, China forum has also been maintained.
[Guest]: Channels of communication should be kept open with, with China because it's a neighbor. It's,
[Guest]: you know, it's staring us down on that frontier. And we have to, we have to be,
[Guest]: we, the need of the hour is really how we can put into action those smart moves,
[Guest]: smart diplomacy that is needed because our strengths are not matched. India and China's
[Guest]: strengths are not evenly matched. So, so the challenge is so much greater for us today than
[Amit Varma]: it was in the fifties. So I'm letting my imagination run wild here. I'm thinking
[Amit Varma]: you're a foreign minister and prime minister Modi ji comes into your room and says, Nirupama ji,
[Amit Varma]: these Chinese have irritated me so much, kuch toh karna parega. Army bheju. And your answer
[Guest]: would be nahi, orchestra bheju. Not orchestra. I'm kidding. But I think that I would say that,
[Guest]: you know, now, Mr. Prime Minister Modi and Xi Jinping had these informal summits, you know,
[Guest]: one in Wuhan and then Mamalapuram. They haven't met or except, you know, not face to face,
[Guest]: but in meetings and all, they have encountered each other since Galwan. But there's been no,
[Guest]: no meeting since then. And I think that is required, that kind of connection has to be
[Guest]: maintained. Even if it means, you know, as they say, swallowing your pride a little,
[Guest]: but it shows your statesmanship also. If you're saying, if you pick up the phone and speak to him
[Guest]: and say, there's a big problem. This should not have happened. Our soldiers died. We had this
[Guest]: bloody brawl. How I wish it need not have happened. Let us sit down together and see
[Guest]: how we can diffuse this. We have to do this in the interest of our people. Why not do this? I
[Amit Varma]: don't think we should worry too much about how it goes down. And it would actually help his image
[Amit Varma]: as a statesman. I mean, help his self-image as well. My final question, because China is not
[Guest]: Pakistan. Pakistan we define as an enemy. China is an adversary. You know, there's a difference
[Guest]: between enemy and adversary. And I won't go into that, but I've written a piece on it. Please
[Amit Varma]: guide your listener. No, words matter. Like another fine distinction I noted in your book
[Amit Varma]: was between border and line of control. And I, you know, I thought we can talk about language
[Amit Varma]: as well, but we haven't had the time because how much can one talk about in four hours?
[Amit Varma]: But a final question for you, which is probably a highlight for many of my listeners,
[Amit Varma]: recommend some books or music for listeners to listen to, which you love. Doesn't have to be
[Amit Varma]: about diplomacy, foreign policy, China, any of this, just books that are really close to your
[Amit Varma]: heart and that you go back to and music that is really close to your heart and, you know, just
[Guest]: means a lot to you. Okay. Difficult. It's a question I haven't given much thought to, but
[Guest]: one of my favorite books is In Praise of Shadows by Junichiro Tanizaki. I don't know if you've
[Amit Varma]: read it. I've read other Tanizaki, like he's got a book with nettles in the title about marriage,
[Guest]: which is beautiful. I forget what it is. Yeah. This, this is a, it's a book of, it's an essay
[Guest]: on Japanese aesthetics and it's a beautiful, it's a thin, slim volume. I love that it speaks about
[Guest]: Japanese aesthetic, but to me, it's very, it's an epigram on life itself and we avoid the shadows,
[Guest]: but you know, interplay of light and shadow is so important to understand the beauty of things and
[Guest]: aesthetics, the aesthetic of it, Japanese aesthetic appeals to me very much. So that, that is,
[Amit Varma]: that is a book that. I remember the title of the Tanizaki book I've read and love,
[Guest]: which is called Some Prefer Nettles. Some Prefer Nettles. Yes. I remember that.
[Guest]: And that would be, I mean, I don't want to burden them with too many, too many books. The Book of
[Guest]: Tea by Okakura Kakuzo is another of my favorite books. I mean, Japan is a, I didn't talk about it
[Guest]: in the podcast, but Japan was the country that made me, that kindled my desire to become a
[Guest]: diplomat. So I feel particularly close to Japan. I never served in Japan, but it's a country that
[Guest]: I feel, you know, I feel in terms of my spirit, very close to, because a lot of what Japanese
[Guest]: culture sort of expresses, appeals a great deal to me and I feel very close to it. So, and then in
[Guest]: terms of music, I'm very fond of, as I said, I like all kinds of music. I like the music of M.S.
[Guest]: Subbalakshmi. I met, I mentioned Maitreem Bhajata. I like the ghazals, Hindustani ghazals. I like the
[Guest]: poetry. I mean, that, that speaks of the culture of this region. Particularly, I love the poetry
[Guest]: of Agha Shahid Ali, the Kashmiri poet who died very young. I love his poetry.
[Amit Varma]: Country without a postcard.
[Guest]: Yeah, a country without a post office.
[Amit Varma]: A country without a post office.
[Guest]: Yeah, I like that. And another piece of music I like very much is, is a Western piece,
[Guest]: The Lark Ascending. I don't know if you've heard it. It's by Ralph Vaughan Williams,
[Guest]: a British composer. It's one of my favourite pieces of music, The Lark Ascending. This is the
[Guest]: idea of a bird soaring, you know, in the, in, up into the sky and so much symbolic of hope and,
[Guest]: and renewal, you know, that, that expresses. And I love many of the operatic arias,
[Guest]: especially from the opera Norma. And one of the important operas, I'll just tell you,
[Guest]: somehow I've gotten to a senior moment. It's a, it's an opera by Bellini. And one of the arias
[Guest]: in that opera is Casta Diva. C-A-S-T-A-D-I-V-A, Casta Diva. It's a beautiful, beautiful aria.
[Guest]: Again, you know, people have, you know, songs, they say, this is a song that I would try to
[Guest]: listen, like to listen to, you know, in my final days or something. It's such a, it's a beautiful
[Guest]: opera. And there's another beautiful aria that I love in, it's, it's Do You Know The Country,
[Guest]: Kone Tu Le Pais. Do You Know That Country, where the singer is singing of a country,
[Guest]: which she has left. She's living somewhere else and she's been exiled from that country. And
[Guest]: she's remembering that country. That's another opera that I feel, that's another aria that I
[Guest]: feel I would love to listen to, you know, till my dying day. Wow. I can't wait to check these
[Amit Varma]: out and listen to these. And thank you so much for being so generous with your time and insights.
[Guest]: Not at all. Not at all. I enjoyed doing this. It's a privilege to be invited onto your show,
[Guest]: to be asked to do this.
[Guest]: Thank you so much. I love this.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.